## Rage against the Machines: Labor-Saving Technology and Unrest in Industrializing England †

By Bruno Caprettini and   Hans-Joachim Voth*

Can new technology cause social instability and unrest? We examine the famous 'Captain Swing' riots in 1830s England.   Newly collected data on threshing machine diffusion shows that   labor-saving technology  was  associated  with  more  riots.  We  instrument  technology adoption with the share of heavy soils in a parish: IV estimates  demonstrate  that  threshing  machines  were  an  important cause of unrest. Where alternative employment opportunities softened the blow of new technology  there was less rioting. Conversely , , where enclosures had impoverished workers  the effect of threshing , machines on rioting was ampli/fied. ( JEL J24, L16, N13, N33, N53, O33, Q16 )

From the invention of steam engines to the IT revolution, the adoption of new echnologies  has  gone    hand  in  hand  with  massive  job  destruction.  Spinners  and t weavers  were  made  redundant  by    steam-powered  textile  mills  200  years  ago; more  recently,  computers  have  replaced  phone  operators,  bookkeepers,  and  others   performing routine jobs, reducing incomes ( Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003 . ) Classical   economists from Marx to Leontief and Keynes predicted that technological unemployment would lead to social and political instability  Marx 1867, Keynes ( 1931, Leontief 1952 . )

And yet, despite clear evidence that   labor-saving technical change puts   downward pressure on wages  Acemoglu and Autor 2011 , its social and political   consequences ( ) are  largely  unexplored.  In  this  paper,  we  examine  whether  the  introduction  of abor-saving technology can cause social instability and political unrest. We do so l by looking at the famous 'Captain Swing' riots in 1830s England-the largest wave

of unrest in English history, with more than 3,000 cases of arson, looting, attacks on authorities, and   machine breaking across 45 counties. 1

Bad weather, a poor harvest, and news of the French and Belgian Revolutions contributed to unrest in 1830 ( Archer 2000, Charlesworth 1979, Hobsbawm and Rudé 1969 . Earlier immiserization had prepared the ground. Enclosures took away ) rural workers' access to the commons, transforming them into a 'landless proletarian, relying almost exclusively on   wage-labor'  Hobsbawm and Rudé 1969, p. 35 , ( ) and Irish immigration put further pressure on incomes  Mokyr, Vickers, and Ziebarth ( 2015 . While England operated an early welfare system ) ( the Poor Laws , it came ) under increasing strain ( Boyer 1990 . Enclosures, Poor Laws, and mechanization ) appear in almost every account of the Swing Riots, but there is so far no hard evidence to establish the importance of individual factors or demonstrate causal effects.

We  collect  new  data  on  threshing  machine  diffusion  from  contemporary newspapers and agricultural surveys. Threshing machines separate the grain from the  chaff,  replacing    hand  threshing  with  a  /flail  swung  overhead.  We  show  that abor-saving technology was a key factor behind the Swing Riots. In parishes withl out threshing machines, the riot probability was 13.6 percent; in places where they had spread, it was twice as high  26.1 percent . Regression results suggest that every ( ) extra  thresher  in  a  parish  sharply  increased  the  frequency  of  unrest.  These  OLS results are robust to the inclusion of many controls and the use of different estimation strategies. Technology adoption itself may have been affected by the risk of riots. To identify the causal effect of new technology, we instrument threshing machine adoption with soil composition. We use the share of heavy,   clay-rich soils, which predicts wheat cultivation-the only crop that could be processed pro/fitably with  early  threshing  machines. We  obtain  strong    IV  results,  con/firming  the  link between   labor-saving technology adoption and unrest.

Two factors tended to modify riot frequency. Enclosure of common land appears to exacerbate the effect of machines on riots. Workers whose livelihood was threatened by new technology had two choices, 'voice' and 'exit'  Hirschman 1970 -( ) they could leave or engage in ( violent  action. In line with this, parishes close to ) manufacturing centers saw fewer protests, suggesting that 'exit' reduced protest frequency.

## I.  Historical Background

English agriculture by 1800 was ef/ficient and highly commercialized, with most output sold on the market ( Crafts 1985 . Large farms operated with hired labor, ) often employed in threshing during the winter ( Thompson 1966 . Threshing is a ) key agricultural activity, loosening the grains from the husks. It is also a laborious process, traditionally using /flails swung overhead. Threshing accounted for up to 50 percent of rural laborer's winter income prior to mechanization  Clark 2001 . ( ) 2

In 1786, Andrew Meikle invented the /first threshing machine  Macdonald 1975 . ( ) Early  threshing  machines  were  expensive  and  unreliable.  They  spread  slowly ( Hobsbawm and Rudé 1969, Macdonald 1975 . After 1810, adoption accelerated as ) prices declined and reliability grew ( Hobsbawm and Rudé 1969 . Machines oper-) ated  by  horses ( water  on average increased productivity per worker by a factor ) of 5 ( 10 ) ( online Appendix B.8 . Threshing machines increasingly deprived rural ) laborers of their main source of income during the winter. Where they had spread, winter unemployment was 7.6 percent; in unaffected areas, it stood at 5.5 percent. 3

The /first Swing Riots broke out in August 1830 in Kent ( Hobsbawm and Rudé 1969 . They quickly spread, with more than 3,000 riots erupting across 45 coun-) ties. Figure 1, panel A shows the geography of unrest. Arson was frequent ( Tilly 1998 .  In  the  second  half  of  1830  alone,  514  threshing  machines  were  attacked ) ( Holland 2005 . All rioters were either rural workers or local craftsmen  Stevenson ) ( 1979 . Unrest was eventually quelled by army units; a special commission passed ) 252 death sentences  Hobsbawm and Rudé 1969 . ( )

## II.  Data

We collect new data on the diffusion of threshing machines using two sources. We  analyze  advertisements  from  60  regional  newspapers  published  between January 1800 and July 1830, containing 118,758 issues.  We search for the string 4 '  threshing machine.' This yields 549 ads from 466 parishes. These either announce the sale / lease of a farm with a threshing machine, or they come from manufacturers listing the names and locations of their clients.

We complement this list with information from the General Views of Agriculture , a set of surveys organized by the Board of Agriculture. Early editions  before 1800 ( ) rarely refer to threshing machines. By 1810, however, each volume devotes an entire chapter to them, discussing technical characteristics and the location of individual threshers. We measure   parish-level machine adoption as the sum of all threshers found in newspapers and in the General Views . Figure 1, panel B shows their geographical distribution.

For unrest, we also use two sources. Data on the Swing Riots come from the Family and Community Historical Research Society  Holland 2005 .  The underly-( ) 5 ing sources are judicial records and newspaper accounts. For the years before 1830, we search for the words 'arson' and 'machine attack' in all newspapers published between 1750 and 1829 in the British Newspaper Archive. This yields a total of 6,392 articles for 'arson' and 15,986 articles for 'machine attack.' To determine whether an article describes an episode of civil unrest, we read each of the 'arson' articles and a 35 percent random sample of the 'machine attack' articles. We then geolocate every relevant episode. This produces a set of 610 actual arson incidents and 69 attacks on machines between 1758 and 1829. Typos, text of poor quality, and

Panel C. Soil composition

<!-- image -->

Panel D. Hotspots of Swing

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Swing Riots, Threshers, and Soil Composition

<!-- image -->

Notes: Panel A: distribution of Swing Riots from Holland  2005 . We plot a uniform spatial kernel with bandwidth ( ) of  /five  kilometers.  Panel  B:  distribution  of  threshers  from  British  Library  and  Findmypast ( British  Newspaper Archive 2016  and ) General Views of Agriculture . We plot a uniform spatial kernel with bandwidth of /five kilometers. Panel C: share of parish area that is heavy from Lawley  2009b . Panel D: heavy soils and riots in North Anglia ( ) ( top  and South England  bottom . ) ( )

lack of geographical information explain why we can use only a fraction of articles. Moreover, many of the 'machine attack' searches returned pages where the words 'machine' and 'attack' appeared in different articles. 6

Information on soil composition comes from the 2007 Geological Map of Great Britain ( Lawley 2009a, b . For each 1 ) × 1 kilometer cell, the map details soil type based on parent soil material. 7 While farming can modify soil composition slowly and at the margin, it is unlikely to have changed the parent soil material between the /first half of the 1800s and the twentieth century, the time of measurement. Figure 1, panel C shows the share of heavy soils  rich in clay  in England and Wales. It varies ( ) from 0 to 100 percent, often within small geographical units. Each county of the United Kingdom contains a wide variety of soil types.

In  addition,  we  use  the  British  population  censuses  of    1801-1831 ( Southall et al. 2004 . For each parish, we construct population density as the log number of ) people divided by the area, the sex ratio as the log of men over women, and the share of agricultural workers as the number of workers employed in agriculture divided by the total number of workers.

We also calculate distances using parish centroids based on an 1851 map  Southall ( and Burton 2004 . The share of common land enclosed before 1820 is from Gonner ) ( 1912 . Historical temperature comes from Luterbacher et al.  2004  and historical ) ( ) precipitation from Pauling et al. ( 2006 . We construct abnormal precipitation and ) temperature in 1830 as the deviation from the average weather in   1800-1828. For general cereal suitability, we use highly geographically disaggregated information on weather patterns and the Food and Agriculture Organization's  FAO  agronomic ( ) model ECOCROP. Weather data for this exercise comes from Hijmans et al.  2005 , ( ) which records temperature and precipitation for the years 1960-1990. Cereal suitability ranges from 1  high suitability  to 0 ( ) ( unsuitable . ) 8 Finally, we use the 1801 corn returns to compute the share of agricultural land that is devoted to wheat cultivation  Turner 1982 . ( )

Table 1 reports summary statistics of our variables. We have a maximum of 9,674 units of observation in our data. Unrest is a count variable. In 86 percent of  parishes,  there  were  no  Swing  Riots. Another  11  percent  registered  one  or two incidents. The remaining 3.5 percent saw 3 or more incidents of unrest. The number of threshing machines is similarly skewed, with 94.7 percent of parishes showing no evidence of adoption and another 4.6 percent having only 1. In only 0.75 percent were there 2 or more threshing machines. In an average parish, more than 38 percent of the adult males worked in agriculture, and more than 83 percent of the land was used for cereal cultivation. The spring and summer of 1830 were unusually wet, as indicated by   higher-than-average rates of precipitation. Winter unemployment was higher than in the summer by an average of 5.5 percentage points.

Table 1-Summary Statistics

|                                                 | Min     | Mean   | Max    | SD    | Observations   |
|-------------------------------------------------|---------|--------|--------|-------|----------------|
| Unrest                                          |         |        |        |       |                |
| Riots before Swing  1758-1829 ( )               | 0.000   | 0.067  | 32.00  | 0.687 | 9,674          |
| Swing Riots  1830-1832 ( )                      | 0.000   | 0.308  | 26.00  | 1.107 | 9,674          |
| Technology                                      |         |        |        |       |                |
| Threshing machines  1800-1829 ( )               | 0.000   | 0.062  | 5.000  | 0.289 | 9,674          |
| Population                                      |         |        |        |       |                |
| Density  1801 ( )                               | 0.237   | 248.5  | 89,762 | 2,855 | 9,674          |
| Share of agricultural workers  1801 ( )         | 0.000   | 0.386  | 1.000  | 0.265 | 9,674          |
| Share of trade workers  1801 ( )                | 0.000   | 0.117  | 1.000  | 0.142 | 9,674          |
| Share of other workers  1801 ( )                | 0.000   | 0.497  | 1.000  | 0.273 | 9,674          |
| Sex ratio  1801 ( )                             | 0.067   | 0.994  | 16.35  | 0.293 | 9,674          |
| Agriculture                                     |         |        |        |       |                |
| Share cereal land  1801 (                       | 0.000   | 0.837  | 1.000  | 0.119 | 3,859          |
| ) Wheat oat value sold ratio  1820s ( )         | 0.081   | 71.74  | 4,864  | 370.4 | 9,562          |
| Wheat oat quantity sold ratio  1820s ( )        | 0.025   | 24.81  | 2,085  | 129.9 | 9,562          |
| Geography                                       |         |        |        |       |                |
| Distance to Elham  /first riot - km ( )         | 3.418   | 237.1  | 555.7  | 108.2 | 9,674          |
| Distance to closest town with newspaper  km ( ) | 0.143   | 24.22  | 123.7  | 17.79 | 9,674          |
| Distance to closest industrial town  km ( )     | 0.000   | 88.54  | 376.1  | 63.35 | 9,674          |
| Share of heavy soil                             | 0.000   | 0.517  | 1.000  | 0.364 | 9,674          |
| Weather                                         |         |        |        |       |                |
| Cereal suitability index                        | 0.211   | 0.634  | 0.908  | 0.097 | 9,674          |
| Abnormal precipitation  spring 1830 - mm ( )    | - 0.234 | 18.76  | 104.3  | 15.76 | 9,674          |
| Abnormal precipitation  summer 1830 - mm ( )    | 78.92   | 104.1  | 226.0  | 22.66 | 9,674          |
| Abnormal temperature  fall 1830 - degrees ( )   | 0.126   | 0.277  | 0.473  | 0.068 | 9,674          |
| Other                                           |         |        |        |       |                |
| Share of land enclosed  1820 ( )                | 0.000   | 2.723  | 28.46  | 4.055 | 6,715          |
| Poor Rates per capita  1803 ( )                 | 0.016   | 0.695  | 5.000  | 0.422 | 1,251          |
| Unemployment share  winter 1834 ( )             | 0.000   | 0.128  | 1.000  | 0.151 | 595            |
| Unemployment share  summer 1834 ( )             | 0.000   | 0.067  | 0.935  | 0.112 | 613            |
| Unemployment share  winter-summer 1834 ( )      | - 0.222 | 0.055  | 0.934  | 0.101 | 574            |

Notes: The unit of observation is the parish. Swing Riots are from Holland ( 2005 , and pre-1830 riots are arsons ) and attacks on machines found in British Library and Findmypast ( British Newspaper Archive 2016 . Threshing ) machine adoption is based on our own data collection, using information from the British Library and Findmypast ( British Newspaper Archive 2016  and the ) General Views of Agriculture . Population data and sectoral shares come from the decennial censuses of England  Southall et al. 2004 . Cultivation patterns are derived from the 1801 crop ( ) returns  Turner 1982 , and sales ratios for crops come from Brunt and Cannon  2013 . Cereal suitability is land suit-( ) ( ) ability for all cereals ( rye, oat, barley, wheat  based on the FAO's ECOCROP model. The share of heavy soil in a ) parish is the surface area classi/fied as 'heavy' in the British Geological Survey Soil Parent Material Model . Weather data is based on historical precipitation and temperature data in Pauling et al.  2006  and Luterbacher et al.  2004 ; ( ) ( ) we calculate abnormal weather conditions by subtracting 1830 weather to average conditions in 1800-1828. Poor Rates per capita is poor relief in pounds per head, based on 1803 spending  taken from the 1832 Royal Commission ( on the Operation of the Poor Law , divided by 1801 population  from the same source . Further details on variable ) ( ) construction are described in online Appendix A.2.

## III.  Empirical Analysis

A. Threshing Machines and Riots

To examine the association between threshing machines and riots, we estimate variants of

$$( 1 ) Riots p =    β  +   β 0 1 Machinesp +   β 2 density p 1801 +   β       +     + X X p θ r e p ,$$

Table 2-Main Results

|                                                                                | Number of Swing Riots   | Number of Swing Riots   | Number of threshers   | Number of threshers   | Number of Swing Riots   | Number of Swing Riots   | Number of Swing Riots   | Number of Swing Riots   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                                                                                | OLS ( 1 )               | OLS ( 2 )               | FS ( 3 )              | FS ( 4 )              | RF ( 5 )                | RF ( 6 )                | 2SLS ( 7 )              | 2SLS ( 8 )              |
| Threshers                                                                      | 0.389 [ 0.071 ]         | 0.353 [ 0.071 ]         |                       |                       |                         |                         | 6.361 [ 1.616 ]         | 6.557 [ 1.768           |
| Share of heavy soil                                                            |                         |                         | - 0.034 [ 0.008 ]     | - 0.033 [ 0.008 ]     | - 0.218 [ 0.026         | - 0.214 [ 0.027 ]       |                         |                         |
| Cereal suitability index                                                       |                         |                         | 0.050 [ 0.032 ]       | 0.044 [ 0.032 ]       | 0.130 [ 0.092           | 0.290 [ 0.096 ]         | - 0.186 [ 0.242 ]       | 0.001 [ 0.245           |
| log 1801 density                                                               | 0.101 [ 0.018 ]         | 0.099 [ 0.018 ]         | 0.015 [ 0.004 ]       | 0.013 [ 0.004 ]       | 0.103 [ 0.018           | 0.100 [ 0.018 ]         | 0.010 [ 0.034 ]         | 0.013 [ 0.034           |
| Share of agricultural  workers in 1801                                         | - 0.065 [ 0.044 ]       | - 0.056 [ 0.043 ]       | - 0.015 [ 0.010 ]     | - 0.022 [ 0.010 ]     | - 0.073 [ 0.045 ]       | - 0.064 [ 0.044 ]       | 0.024 [ 0.079 ]         | 0.081 [ 0.087           |
| log 1801 sex ratio                                                             | - 0.181 [ 0.042 ]       | - 0.193 [ 0.043 ]       | - 0.024 [ 0.014 ]     | - 0.011 [ 0.014 ]     | - 0.187 [ 0.043 ]       | - 0.204 [ 0.044 ]       | - 0.035 [ 0.101 ]       | - 0.130 [ 0.099         |
| log distance to Elham                                                          | - 0.325 [ 0.029 ]       | - 0.217 [ 0.045 ]       | - 0.006 [ 0.004 ]     | 0.070 [ 0.007 ]       | - 0.335 [ 0.031 ]       | - 0.217 [ 0.047 ]       | - 0.294 [ 0.040 ]       | - 0.674 [ 0.133         |
| log distance to newspaper                                                      | 0.022 [ 0.018 ]         | 0.019 [ 0.019 ]         | - 0.000 [ 0.005 ]     | 0.000 [ 0.006 ]       | 0.022 [ 0.018 ]         | 0.022 [ 0.019 ]         | 0.025 [ 0.036 ]         | 0.022 [ 0.041           |
| Region /fixed effects  5 ( ) R 2                                               | No 0.057                | Yes 0.064               | No 0.006              | Yes 0.032             | No 0.052                | Yes 0.061               | No                      | Yes                     |
| Mean dependent variable F -test excluded instrument Rubin-Anderson test  ( p ) | 0.308                   | 0.308                   | 0.062 17.7            | 0.062 15.9            | 0.308                   | 0.308                   | 0.308                   | 0.308                   |
| Observations                                                                   |                         |                         |                       |                       |                         |                         | 0.000                   | 0.000                   |
|                                                                                | 9,674                   | 9,674                   | 9,674                 | 9,674                 | 9,674                   | 9,674                   | 9,674                   | 9,674                   |

Notes: Columns 1-2: OLS estimates of equation  1 ; dependent variable is number of Swing Riots. Columns 3-4: ( ) /first stage estimates of equation ( 3 ; dependent variable is number of threshers. Columns 5-6: reduced form esti-) mates of equation  4 ; dependent variable is number of Swing Riots. Columns 7-8: IV estimates of equation  1 , ( ) ( ) using share of heavy soil as instrument; dependent variable is number of Swing Riots. See online Appendix Table 14 for results with county /fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets.

where Riots p is the number of unrest events in parish    during   1830-1832, p Machines p is the number of threshing machines in   1800-1830, density p 1801 is the ( log of  popu-) lation density from the 1801 Census, and X is a vector of additional controls including share of agricultural workers,   male-female ratio ( both from the 1801 Census , ) and distance to the closest newspaper town and to Elham, the village of the /first riots. In the most demanding speci/fication, we include θ r /fixed effects for four regions of , England plus Wales. 9

Table 2 presents our main results. There is a strong, positive correlation between riots and adoption of the new machines. Coef/ficients are highly signi/ficant whether we control for all parish characteristics  column 1  or add region /fixed effects  col-( ) ( umn 2 .  Controls  partly  account  for  alternative  explanations.  Denser  places  had ) more riots; sheer numbers were important to organize collective action. Parishes with higher   male-female ratios in 1801 sent fewer men to /fight the Napoleonic Wars; these areas experience lower unrest in 1830, suggesting that returning soldiers had a role ( Grif/fin 2012 . Finally, contagion was important, as places closer to the /first ) riot in Elham saw signi/ficantly more unrest ( Aidt, Leon, and Satchell 2017 . We ) lack suf/ficient data to control for other proposed   explanations of the riots, including

discontent with the Poor Laws and Irish immigration. We deal with threats to identi/fication in Section IIIB. 10

The strength of the association is noteworthy because our measure of technology adoption is noisy, biasing our estimates downward ( Deaton 1997 . Unobservables ) are  unlikely  to  drive  our  results-adding  controls  barely  changes  the  size  of  the coef/ficient on threshing machines. If we compare the model on column 2 with the model that only controls for density, we /find that selection of unobservables should be 54.8 percent of the selection on observables to rule out a signi/ficant effect of machines on riots ( Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005; Oster 2019 . This ratio is high, ) especially  because  unobservables  include  all  threshing  machines  in  operation  in 1830 but not mentioned in newspapers or surveys.

## B. Identi/fication

There are three reasons why OLS estimates may be biased. First, landlords and farmers may have been less inclined to adopt   labor-saving technologies where the risk of protest was high. Anecdotal evidence from the period suggests that this is a valid concern. 11 This would bias estimates downward. Second, there may be omitted variables that affect both the adoption of   labor-saving technologies and the likelihood of rural protest. While the inclusion of observed characteristics does not affect point estimates in Table 2, other unobserved characteristics may correlate with technology adoption and riots. This could also affect our estimates. Third, measurement error in technology adoption is likely to bias coef/ficients downward, because we do not observe all threshing machines in use between 1800 and 1830. 12

To address these issues we need exogenous variation in the adoption of threshing machines. Suitability to cereal farming in general ( any one of wheat, oats, barley, and rye  itself is not plausibly excludable, since it correlates with the number of ) agricultural  laborers  in  a  parish-and  without  numerous  dissatis/fied  individuals, there could be no riots. Our instrument for thresher adoption is soil suitability for wheat . We expect it to predict thresher adoption because wheat was the only grain suitable for mechanical threshing. 13 We measure wheat suitability with the share of land in a parish classi/fied as consisting of 'heavy soil,' that is, soil rich in clay. Due to the-somewhat unusual-characteristics of clay soils in Britain, the heavier the soil, the harder it was to cultivate wheat:

Clay…is fertile  in  proportion  to  the  humus  which  it  contains  …  It  then forms … rich  wheat  soils  which  produce  many  successive  abundant crops … The clay soils of Britain are not in general of this fertile kind. They are of a compact nature which retains water …  This has made lighter soils, which are more easily worked, to be generally preferred … and the

10 The number of Swing Riots is a count variable, and almost 86 percent of the parishes do not experience unrest during   1830-1832. Thus, a linear model may not be appropriate. Online Appendix Table 12 shows that results are robust to alternative estimation methods.

mode of cultivation of the light soils has advanced more rapidly towards perfection than that of the clays.

( Rahm 1844, p.146, entry on 'clay' )

In other words, since wheat was the most valuable cash crop grown by farmers, it was more often sown on the lighter soils. 14

## C. Validity of the Instrument: Balance    Pretrends  and First Stage , ,

Figure  2,  panel  A  documents  the  strength  of  the  unconditional  association between soil composition and threshing machine adoption. It shows a binscatter of threshers ( on the   -axis  against the share of heavy soils y ) ( -axis x ) . As the share of heavy soil increases from 0 percent to 100 percent, the penetration of threshing machines falls by half.

Figure 2, panel B shows that the share of heavy soils in a parish is not correlated with welfare support  Poor Rates per capita , distance to Elham  where the /first riots ( ) ( erupted , occupational composition, population density, the sex ratio, or the share ) of cereals grown. Crucially, our data is also balanced in terms of   pre-1830 unrest.

Panel  C  shows  the  effect  of  heavy  soil  on  unrest  over  time.  We  estimate  the ollowing panel regression: f

$$( 2 ) Riots pt =      + γ p ∑         · t = pre 1800 1830 γ 1 t Share heavy p +   γ 2 density pt +   γ        +      + X X pt χ rt v pt ,$$

where   indicates   time-varying variables, and the unit of observation is a   parish-decade. t We control for parish /fixed effects and decade /fixed effects interacted with regional dummies, the share of heavy soil, and distances. Figure 2, panel C plots the coef/ficients and 95 percent con/fidence intervals of the share of heavy soils interacted with decade dummies. The effect of heavy soil on   pre-1830 unrest is small and insignificant before 1830 and then becomes large and signi/ficant. This suggests that before threshing machines spread, soil characteristics promoting wheat farming were not associated with more civic unrest.

Next, we regress the number of threshing machines in parish p ( Machinesp ) on the share of heavy soil in a parish:

$$( 3 ) Machinesp = +   α α 0 1 Share heavy p +   α 2 density p 1801 +   α       +   ψ  + X X p r up .$$

The /first stage is strong in all speci/fications ( Table 2, columns   3-4 ). The   -statistic F is 17.7 with controls and 15.9 when adding region /fixed effects.

## D. Reduced Form and IV Results

Before  presenting  reduced  form  and  IV  results,  we  illustrate  our  /findings. Figure 1 combines information on soil composition, threshing machine adoption, and  the  location  of  Swing  Riots.  Panel A  gives  the  distribution  of  riots.  Panel

Panel C. Pretrends

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Panel B. Balance

β -coefficient of heavy soil

<!-- image -->

Panel D. Reduced formFigure 2. Validity of the IV: First Stage, Balance,   Pretrends, and Reduced Form

<!-- image -->

Notes: Panel A: /first stage. Unconditional binscatter of the share of heavy soils    -axis  against number of   threshers ( x ) ( -axis y ) . From the full sample of 9,674 parishes, we create 20 bins of roughly equal sample size; the /first 2 and last 3 bins have no variation in share of heavy soils and are combined into a single data point. Slope estimated from a bivariate regression of number of threshers on share of heavy soils in the full sample; robust standard errors in parentheses. Panel B: graph plots standardized beta coef/ficients of   bivariate regressions of the variables listed on the left on the share of heavy soil, showing balance in our sample. Bars represent 95 percent con/fidence intervals calculated from robust standard errors. See online Appendix Table 8, column 1 for   nonstandardized coef/ficients. Panel C: elationship between   pre-1830 riots and share of heavy soils. The graph plots the estimates and 95 percent con/fir dence   intervals of γ 1 t from equation  2  in the text. We report the average number of episodes in every decade on top ( ) of the estimates. See online Appendix Table 9, column 4 for full estimates. Panel D: reduced form. Unconditional binscatter of the share of heavy soil    -axis  against number of Swing Riots ( x ) ( y -axis . From the full sample of 9,674 ) parishes, we create 20 bins of roughly equal sample size; the /first 2 and last 3 bins have no variation in share of heavy soils and are combined into a single data point. Slope estimated from a bivariate regression of the number of Swing Riots on share of heavy soils in the full sample; robust standard errors in parentheses.

B shows the spread of threshers by 1830 and panel C the distribution of heavy soils.  Riots  were  concentrated  in  Wiltshire,  Berkshire,  and  Hampshire,  in  the outheastern counties of Kent and Sussex, and in Norfolk. These regions are also s the ones that are more suitable to wheat cultivation, as indicated by their lower share of heavy soils. Where threshers spread the most, unrest erupted frequently in 1830.

The reduced form results point to a strong and robust relationship between our instrument and the incidence of riots. Figure 2, panel D shows an unconditional binscatter of threshers ( on the   -axis  against the share of heavy soils y ) ( -axis x ) . As

the share of heavy soil increases from 0 to 100 percent, the likelihood of riots falls from over 40 to less than 20 percent. In Table 2, columns   5-6, we add   controls and estimate:

$$( 4 ) Riots p = +   γ γ 0 1 Share heavy p +   γ 2 density p 1801 +   γ     +   χ  + X X p r v p ,$$

where variables are de/fined as in equations  1  and  3 . When controlling for other ( ) ( ) factors, a higher share of heavy soil in a parish strongly predicts fewer riots.

The IV results similarly show a strong link between threshing and unrest. Whether we use region /fixed effects or not, we /find that there is a large and signi/ficant effect from the part of machine adoption determined by soil composition on riot incidence. The IV estimates in Table 2 suggest that one extra machine, installed because of land  characteristics,  translated  into  6.  4-6.6  more  riots  during    1830-1832.  These numbers are signi/ficantly larger than OLS estimates for the reasons we discussed in Section IIIB.

Our OLS, reduced form, and IV results are robust to a wide range of alternative estimation methods, the inclusion of county /fixed effects, and different corrections for spatial autocorrelation as well as estimation for areas close to towns with newspapers  online Appendix C . ( )

## IV.  Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances

What factors ampli/fied or mitigated the impact of technology adoption on unrest? We document that in areas where other factors impoverished rural workers, the relationship between technology adoption and riots was stronger. In contrast, access to alternative employment dampened the effect of mechanization on riots. For this analysis, we study the relationship between machines and riots in different sample splits. Because the /first stage loses power in   subsamples, we use simple OLS, viewing the results in this section as suggestive. 15

## A. Alternative Employment

Where workers could easily /find alternative employment,   labor-saving technologies did not lead to social unrest-workers chose 'exit' and not 'voice' in the parlance of Hirschman ( 1970 . In 1830s England, many towns were thriving. We ) expect  rural  workers  living  in  areas  nearby  to  migrate  more  readily  in  response to  the  introduction  of    labor-saving  machines.  In  other  words,  in  the  presence  of alternative urban employment opportunities, the introduction of threshing machines should engender less opposition, resulting in fewer Swing Riots.

For each parish in England, we compute the distance to the closest manufacturing center. We split the sample into   above-median and   below-median distance from one

Figure 3. Aggravating and Attenuating Circumstances

<!-- image -->

Notes: The /figure reports point estimates and 95 percent con/fidence intervals for equation  1  estimated on   different ( ) sample splits. We estimate simple OLS regression as the /first stage loses power in   subsamples. Left panel:   parishes distant from  close to  industries are above  below  the median distance from one of the 15 manufacturing   centers ( ) ( ) of  England ( see  online Appendix A.2  for  details .  See  online Appendix Table  10  for  full  results.  Right  panel: ) parishes with high  low  enclosures are above  below  the median level of enclosure  see online Appendix A.2 for ( ) ( ) ( details . See online Appendix Table 11 for full results. )

of these 15 centers. The half that is closest to a manufacturing city will arguably have greater scope for   rural-urban migration. 16

We plot OLS estimates of equation  1  for the two   subsamples in the left panel of ( ) Figure 3 ( full results are in online Appendix Table 10 . Solid black dots show that ) adoption of threshing machines was associated with signi/ficantly more riots in the 4,785 parishes that lie far away from manufacturing centers. The relationship is still signi/ficantly different from 0 for the other, closer half of the sample, but the coef/ficient is only one-third in size. The coef/ficients are signi/ficantly different from each other in all speci/fications.

## B. Enclosures

We now ask whether enclosure prior to 1820 ampli/fied the effect of machine adoption on riots. This is plausible because enclosure on average worsened conditions for agricultural laborers, who had often kept cows or sheep on the commons ( Neeson 1996, Mingay 2014 . Where most land is enclosed,   labor-saving technol-) ogies are especially harmful to workers since they have no other source of income.

In the right panel of Figure 3, we split our sample into two groups by proportion of land enclosed  full results are in online Appendix Table 11 . ( ) 17 The /figure shows OLS regressions, with solid red dots for   above-median enclosures and open green ones for   below-median parishes. In all cases, the relationship between machines and riots is strong and precisely estimated in parishes with   above-median enclosures. In contrast, we /find a markedly smaller effect in areas with few enclosures.

## V.  Conclusions

During one famous historical episode, the Swing Riots in Britain in   1830-1832, unrest was strongly correlated with the adoption of   labor-saving technology. Using newly collected data on the diffusion of threshing machines, we demonstrate that where threshing machines had spread, the probability of riots was twice as high as in areas where they had not been adopted. We use soil suitability for wheat to   identify an exogenous cause of threshing machine adoption-the machines were unsuitable for other crops. Areas with better conditions for wheat cultivation   witnessed both greater adoption of threshing machines and markedly more riots. Importantly, soil suitability for wheat is uncorrelated with grain suitability overall. Areas most suited for wheat-and hence the adoption of threshing machines-also had not   witnessed more social unrest prior to 1830, reducing the risk of   pretrends and   unobservable actors  driving  our  results.  While  many  factors  led  to  the  outbreak  of  unrest  in f England and Wales in   1830-1832, we demonstrate a clear causal contribution of echnological change to social unrest. t

New technology did not spell more unrest everywhere. In areas far from major manufacturing towns, we /find tentative evidence that threshing machine adoption had stronger effects on arson, attacks on the local authorities, machine breaking, or tumultuous assemblies. In contrast, where ease of access to alternative employment made workers' exit a realistic option, technological unemployment was less likely to translate into social unrest. The same pattern is visible under OLS for enclosures. Where workers had lost access to common lands, reducing their income, threshing machine adoption tended to spell more political instability.

Our /findings unify the literatures on technological change and the   economic determinants of unrest, providing evidence for an additional channel-the   distributional effect of the new technology. The current literature on income and unrest overwhelmingly focuses on negative shocks. In contrast, new   technologies represent a positive shock to output and productivity. Threshing machines are   labor saving, producing the same output with less work. This increased pro/fits for landowners but reduced the share of income going to labor. 18 Second, we focus on a large and rapid dislocation in the labor market driven by technological change. Threshing was the main income source for agricultural laborers for many months of the year. Mechanical threshing

largely eliminated winter earnings for agricultural laborers, who constituted the relative majority of the labor force in most English counties    Shaw-Taylor et al. 2010 . ( ) This is in contrast with more recent cases of technological change, which involve relatively gradual shifts affecting a small part of the labor force  such as telephone oper-( ators or secretaries . Third, while threshing machines substituted unskilled workers, ) they did not create new occupations for skilled ones: manual threshers were replaced with equipment operated by horses, women, and boys. This is in contrast with more recent cases of technology adoption, which often increase demand for   high-skill jobs ( Autor, Katz, Krueger 1998; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2020 . )

Social unrest as a result of technological unemployment has so far been a rare event-but  such  tranquility  is  not  inevitable.  The  Swing  Riots  demonstrate  that rapid, regionally concentrated job losses can quickly lead to political instability and violence.

## REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. 'Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.' In Handbook of Labor Economics , Vol. 4, Part B, edited by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, 1043-1171. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

- Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2020. 'Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets.' Journal of Political Economy 128  6 : 2188-2244. ( )
- Aidt, Toke S., and Raphaël Franck. 2015. 'Democratization under the Threat of Revolution: Evidence from the Great Reform Act of 1832.' Econometrica 83  2 : 505-47. ( )
- Aidt, Toke, Gabriel Leon, and Max Satchell. 2017. ''The Social Dynamics of Riots: Evidence from the Captain Swing Riots, 1830-31.' https://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/seminarpapers/pspe02052017.pdf.
- Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. 'Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.' Journal of Political Economy 113  1 : 151-84. ( )
- Archer, John E. 2000. Social Unrest and Popular Protest in England, 1780-1840 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. 'Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?' Quarterly Journal of Economics 113  4 : 1169-1213. ( )

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. 'The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.' Quarterly Journal of Economics 118  4 : 1279-1333. ( ) Boyer, George R. 1990. An Economic History of the English Poor Law, 1750-1850 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

British Newspaper Archive. 2016. Findmypast and British Library. https://www. britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/.

- Brunt, Liam, and Edmund Cannon. 2013. 'The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth: The English Corn Returns as a Data Source in Economic History, 1770-1914.' European Review of Economic History 17  3 : 318-39. ( )
- Caird, James. 1852. English Agriculture in 1850-51 . London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.
- Caprettini, Bruno, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2020. 'Rage against the Machines: Labor-Saving Technologies and Unrest in Industrializing England: Dataset.' American Economic Review: Insights . https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20190385.
- Charlesworth, Andrew. 1979. Social Protest in a Rural Society: The Spatial Diffusion of the Captain Swing Disturbances of 1830-1831 . Norwich: Historical Geography Research.
- Checkland, S. G., and E. O. A. Checkland, eds. 1974. The Poor Law Report of 1834 . London: Penguin Books.
- Clark,  Gregory. 2001.  'Farm  Wages  and  Living  Standards  in  the  Industrial  Revolution:  England, 1670-1869.' Economic History Review 54  3 : 477-505. ( )
- Crafts, N. F. R. 1985. British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Dal Bó, Ernesto, and Pedro Dal Bó. 2011. 'Workers, Warriors, and Criminals: Social Con/flict in General Equilibrium.' Journal of the European Economic Association 9 ( 4 : 646-77. )

Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy . Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

Dube, Oeindrila, and Juan F. Vargas. 2013. 'Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Con/flict: Evidence from Colombia.' Review of Economic Studies 80  4 : 1384-1421. ( )

Gonner, E. C. K. 1912. Common Land and Inclosure . London: Macmillan.

Grif/fin, Carl J. 2012. The Rural War: Captain Swing and the Politics of Protest . Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Hammond, J. L., and Barbara Hammond. 1920. The Village Labourer, 1760-1832: A Study in the Government of England Before the Reform Bill . London: Longmans, Green, and Co.

Hijmans, Robert J., Susan E. Cameron, Juan L. Parra, Peter G. Jones, and Andy Jarvis. 2005. 'Very High Resolution Interpolated Climate Surfaces for Global Land Areas.' International Journal of Climatology 25  15 : 1965-78. ( )

Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hobsbawm, Eric, and George Rudé. 1969. Captain Swing . London: Lawrence &amp; Wishart.

Holland, Michael, ed. 2005. Swing Unmasked: The Agricultural Riots of 1830 to 1832 and Their Wider Implications . London: Family and Community Historical Research Society.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1931. 'Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren.' In Essays in Persuasion , 321-32. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Lawley, R. 2009a. The Soil Parent Material Database: Methodology . Nottingham, UK: British Geological Survey.

Lawley, R. 2009b. User Guide: Soil Parent Material 1 Kilometre Dataset . Nottingham, UK: British Geological Survey.

Leontief, Wassily. 1952. 'Machines and Man.' Scienti/fic American 187  3 : 150-60. ( )

Luterbacher, Jürg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean, and Heinz Wanner. 2004. 'European Seasonal and Annual Temperature Variability, Trends, and Extremes since 1500.' Science 303 ( 5663 : 1499-1503. )

Macdonald,  Stuart. 1975.  'The  Progress  of  the  Early  Threshing  Machine.' Agricultural  History Review 23  1 : 63-77. ( )

Marx, Karl.

1867.

Capital: A Critique of Political Economy

. V ol. 1. London: Penguin Books.

Mingay, Gordon E. 2014. Parliamentary Enclosure in England: An Introduction to Its Causes, Incidence and Impact, 1750-1850 . London: Routledge.

Mokyr, Joel, Chris Vickers, and Nicolas L. Ziebarth. 2015. 'The History of Technological Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth: Is This Time Different?' Journal of Economic Perspectives 29  3 : 31-50. ( )

Neeson, J. M. 1996. Commoners: Common Right, Enclosure and Social Change in England, 17001820 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Oster, Emily. 2019. 'Unobservable Selection and Coef/ficient Stability: Theory and Evidence.' Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics 37  2 : 187-204. ( )

Pauling, Andreas, Jürg Luterbacher, Carlo Casty, and Heinz Wanner. 2006. 'Five Hundred Years of Gridded High-Resolution Precipitation Reconstructions over Europe and the Connection to LargeScale Circulation.' Climate Dynamics 26: 387-405.

Rahm, W. L. 1844. Dictionary of the Farm . London: Charles Knight and Co.

Shaw-Taylor, L., R. S. Davies, P. M. Kitson, G. Newton, A. E. M. Satchell, and E. A. Wrigley. 2010. 'The Occupational Structure of England and Wales c. 1817-1881.' https://www.campop.geog.cam. ac.uk/research/projects/occupations/britain19c/papers/paper4.pdf.

Southall, H. R., and N. Burton. 2004. 'GIS of the Ancient Parishes of England and Wales, 1500-1850.' Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive. http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-4828-1.

Southall, H. R., P. Ell, D. A. Gatley, and I. Gregory. 2004. 'Great Britain Historical Database: Census Data: Parish-Level Population Statistics, 1801-1951.' Colchester, Essex: UK Data Archive. http:// doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-4560-1.

Stevenson, John. 1979. Popular Disturbances in England, 1700-1832 . London: Longman.

Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. 'A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak Identi/fication in Generalized Method of Moments.' Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics 20  4 : 518-29. ( )

Thompson, E. P. 1966. The Making of the English Working Class . London: Penguin Books.

Tilly, Charles. 1998. Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758-1834 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Turner, Michael. 1982. 'Agricultural Productivity in England in the Eighteenth Century: Evidence from Crop Yields.' Economic History Review 35  4 : 489-510. ( )

## This article has been cited by:

- 1. Gökhan Şen. 202⒌ Effects of urban sprawl due to migration on spatiotemporal land use-land cover change: a case study of Bartın in Türkiye. Scientific Reports 15 :1. . [Crossref]
- 2. Raphaël Franck. 202⒋ La Démocratisation Sous la Menace Révolutionnaire. Journal des Économistes et des Études Humaines . [Crossref]
- ⒊Stephen Morris, Mehdi Shadmehr. 202⒋ Repression and Repertoires. American Economic Review: Insights 6 :3, 413-43⒊ [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
- ⒋Davide Cantoni, Andrew Kao, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman. 202⒋ Protests. Annual Review of Economics 16 :1, 519-54⒊ [Crossref]
- ⒌Jörg J. Dötsch. The Digital Transformation as a Starting Point 13-2⒏ [Crossref]
- ⒍Jörg J. Dötsch. Labour and Incomes 177-20⒋ [Crossref]
- ⒎Gift Mugano, Nirmala Dorasamy. Using SMEs to Building Resilience and Sustainability of African Economies 211-22⒋ [Crossref]
- ⒏Sriram Divi. Digital Technologies for SMEs and Job Creation in Africa 89-101. [Crossref]
- ⒐Julia Brewer, Ashley Larsen, Frederik Noack. 202⒋ The land use consequences of rural to urban migration*. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 106 :1, 177-20⒌ [Crossref]
- ⒑Toon Van Overbeke. 202⒊ Conflict or cooperation? Exploring the relationship between cooperative institutions and robotisation. British Journal of Industrial Relations 61 :3, 550-57⒊ [Crossref]
- ⒒Alexander Donges, Felix Selgert. Einordnung der Ergebnisse und Ausblick 217-22⒌ [Crossref]
- ⒓Filippo Belloc,  Gabriel  Burdin,  Fabio  Landini.  202⒊  Advanced  Technologies  and  Worker  Voice. Economica 90 :357, 1-3⒏ [Crossref]
- ⒔Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou. 2022. The Political Economy of Populism. Journal of Economic Literature 60 :3, 753-832. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
- ⒕Aina Gallego, Thomas Kurer. 2022. Automation, Digitalization, and Artificial Intelligence in the Workplace:  Implications  for  Political  Behavior. Annual  Review  of  Political  Science 25 :1,  463-48⒋ [Crossref]
- ⒖Toke Aidt, Gabriel Leon-Ablan. 2022. The Interaction of Structural Factors and Diffusion in Social Unrest: Evidence from the Swing Riots. British Journal of Political Science 52 :2, 869-88⒌ [Crossref]
- ⒗Lena  Gerling,  Kim  Leonie  Kellermann.  2022.  Contagious  populists:  The  impact  of  election information shocks on populist party preferences in Germany. European Journal of Political Economy 72 , 10209⒏ [Crossref]
- ⒘Toke Aidt, Gabriel Leon-Ablan, Max Satchell. 2022. The Social Dynamics of Collective Action: Evidence from the Diffusion of the Swing Riots, 1830-1831. The Journal of Politics 84 :1, 209-22⒌ [Crossref]
- ⒙Alessandro Belmonte, Armando Di Lillo. 2021. Backlash against affirmative action: Evidence from the South Tyrolean package. European Economic Review 137 , 103802. [Crossref]
- ⒚Daniel J. Finnegan, Alexia Zoumpoulaki, Parisa Eslambolchilar. 2021. Does Mixed Reality Have a Cassandra Complex?. Frontiers in Virtual Reality 2 . . [Crossref]
- ⒛Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou. 20⒛ The Political Economy of Populism. SSRN Electronic Journal 105 . . [Crossref]