## The Output o f the British Iron Industry before 1870'

## BY PHILIP RIDEN

INCE the pioneer studies of Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz and of Deane and Cole on British economic  growth in the long run, efforts  have been made to S refine the quantitative base on which work of this kind must rest.* In the case of the iron industry,  there has yet to be a thorough reappraisal of early statistics, although both C. K. Hyde and George Hammersley have looked at aspects of the problem.3 This article seeks to reassess contemporary evidence  for the scale ofiron-making  in Great Britain before the last quarter of the nineteenth century; to present a new series  of estimates of output in the long run, but especially in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; and to discuss very briefly how such a  series throws new light on problems of economic  growth in Britain during the Industrial Revolution.

I

Although iron has been made in Great Britain since prehistoric times, no serious attempt can be made to measure the size of the industry before the sixteenth century, when the relatively large number of often short-lived bloomery ironworks gave way to a small number of more permanent blast  furnace^.^ Since the number offurnaces in use at agiven date can be established  fairly  precisely,  as  can their average output, it is possible to make rough estimates of total output. For the period from the early sixteenth century to the first decade of the eighteenth,

I am very grateful to Dr R. M. Hartwell for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article.

A. D. Gayer, W. W. Rostow, and A. J.  Schwartz, The Growth and Fluctuations ofthe British Economy, z790-z850 (Oxford, 1953) ; Phyllis  Deane and W. A. Cole, British  Economic Growth, z68&amp;zg59. 7rends and Structures (Cambridge, 1962). Among more recent work see G.  R. Hawke and M.  C. Reed, 'Railway Capital in the United Kingdom in the Nineteenth Century', Economic History Review, 2nd ser. xxn  (1969), 269-86; Roger Burt, 'Lead Production in England and Wales, 1700-70', Econ. H it s Rev. 2nd ser. xx11 (1969),  49-68; 2 John Langton, 'Coal  Output in South-West  Lancashire, 1590-1  9 9 ' , 7 Econ. Hist Re v . 2nd ser. xxv  (1972)) 28-54, and  J.  R. Harris, 'The  Employment of Steam Power in the Eighteenth Century', History, LII  (1967), 133-48.

C. K. Hyde, 'Technological  Change and the Development of the British Iron Industry, 1700-1870' (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Wisconsin, 1971) ; George Hammersley, 'The Charcoal Iron Industry and its Fuel, 1540-1750', Econ. Hist. Rev. 2nd ser. xxv~  1973), 3-613. ( 59 Also see M. W. Flinn, 'Revisions  in Economic  History. xvn. The Growth of the English Iron Industry, 1660-1  6 0 ' , 7 Econ. Hist. Rev. zndser. XI  (195%g), 4-53; . 14 H R. Schubert, Histmy of the British  Iron andsteel Industry from c. $50 B.C. to A.D. z775 (1957) ; Alan Birch, The Economic Histoy o f the British Iron andsteel Indwtry, r784-zS79 (1967).

In bloomery iron-making ore was reduced directly to a decarburized iron suitable for working up by smiths and others; with the introduction of the blast-furnace the process was divided into two stages. Ore was smelted in a blast-furnace to produce pig-iron, which contained a fairly high percentage of carbon and which was decarburized by refining  in a forge. Until the introduction of puddling at the end ofthe eighteenth century a forge generally  consisted  oftwo parts, a finery and a chafery,  in both ofwhich pig-iron was reheated and reworked to produce bar-iron, the main product of the industry during the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries.

Table I . Occupied Blast-Furnace Sites, Average Furnace Output, and  Total  Output,  b y Decades,  England  and Wales, 1530-1719

| Date         | Furnaces   | Average ouput  (tons)   | Total  outfut  (000  tons)   |
|--------------|------------|-------------------------|------------------------------|
| 1530-9       | 6          | 200                     | 1'2                          |
| 1540-9       | 22         | 200                     | 4'4                          |
| 1550-9       | 26         | 200                     | 5'2                          |
| 1 5 6 -      | 44         | 200                     | 8.8                          |
| 1570-9       | 67         | 200                     | '3'4                         |
| '580-9       | 76         | 200                     | 15-2                         |
| '590-9       | 82         | 200                     | 16.4                         |
| 1600-9       | 89         | 200                     | 17-8                         |
| 1610-19      | 79         | 215                     | 17.0                         |
| 1620-9       | 82         | 230                     | 19.0                         |
| 1630-9       | 79         | 250                     | 2 0 ' 0                      |
| I  6 4 0 - 9 | 82         | 260                     | 21'0                         |
| 1650-9       | a6         | 270                     | 23.0                         |
| I  6 6 0 - 9 | 81         | 2 0  7                  | 22'0                         |
| I  6 7 0 - 9 | 7 '        | 270                     | 19.0                         |
| 1680-9       | 68         | 300                     | 21'0                         |
| I  90-9  6   | 78         | 300                     | 23.0                         |
| 1700-9       | 76         | 3'5                     | 24.0                         |
| 1710-19      | 74         | 340                     | 25.0                         |

Sources  and methods: Estimates for 1530-9 to 1700-9 are taken directly from Hammersley, loc. cit. for which the method is discussed on pp. 442-3. The aggregate estimate for 1710-rg is  the same as Hammersley's but the number of furnaces and average output are calculated  from data in Hyde, Thesis, discussed below, PP. 447-8.

figures worked out by Dr Hammersley (Table I ) are unlikely to be superseded until local studies  revise his estimates of the number of furnaces  in use.l Because ofthe limitations  ofthe  sources,  the  figures  are  for 'average' years  in each decade but indicate the general course of growth during the first two centuries of blastfurnace production. They are certainly to be preferred to the estimates  of Simon Sturtevant and Dud Dudley for the early seventeenth  century of 300 furnaces  and 500 forges,  or a government calculation of I 636 of 300 furnaces  and forges, which constitute the only contemporary material for this period.2

During the first half of the eighteenth century the debate over the regulation of  the colonial iron  industry  produced  several estimates of  the  output of the domestic  industry which appear to be tolerably a~curate.~  I In 737-8 a Commons committee heard evidence which referred to an estimate of the output of both pig- and bar-iron in England and Wales then and about twenty years earlier. Abraham Spooner, an ironmonger and importer, spoke of a 'Computation made in the Year I 718', which showed that some 18,000 tons of bar-iron were then made in  England,  whereas by  I 738 the total  was  'not above I 2 or, at most I 5,000 Ton'. The Worcestershire  ironmaster Edward Knight told the committee

444

that 'he had made a List of all the Forges in England and Wales' which also indicated an output ofabout 18,000 tons  in 1718, a figure  which had since fallen by some 6,000 tons. William Rea, a Monmouthshire ironmaster, speaking of I 7 1 7-18, said  that 'by a Calculation  he then made''  it  appeared that the furnaces made about 25,000 tons a year and the forges about I 8,000 tons. Of the present time he added that 'by a Calculation that he has had, of which he knows great Part to be true, there are about I 25 Forges; and believes upwards of 30 of those are unemployed, and the others don't make about 2/3ds of the Quantity of Iron which they might and could make, was there encouragement  given.'l

This evidence  is confirmed by an anonymous  and undated pamphlet containing a 'List of the Forges  in Englandand Wales: With an Account of the Quantity of Iron they have Annually made and do now make according  to the best Information we could get-What Forges are in Scotland we have not been capable of getting any Information.'2  Among the material collected  by  James Weale at  the beginning  of the nineteenth  century  for an abortive  history of the iron trade there is a transcript of this pamphlet, with a note, presumably by Weale, that 'The first column  is the amount of the produce on an average of a few years previously to I 718. The second is the amount o f their produce in I 736.'3 On this basis the pamphlet can be assigned  with some confidence  to I 737. About I 30 forges  appear in the list, which is arranged alphabetically by county from Berkshire to Yorkshire. For most forges two output figures are given, one headed 'Have made', and the other 'DO  make'; the second is invariably  either the same as the first or less and in some cases is nil. A single output figure is given in both columns for three  forges in  Durham  and  occasionally elsewhere two  or three  works  are grouped  together. In  the case offour  Wealden forges  no outputs appear and  there is a note that 'Of the four last we have no Account, but their Names in an old List.' The  output figures  in the first  column  total 19,485 tons, those  in the second I 2, I 90, a drop of 7,295 tons over the years, apparently, I 7  I 8-36. A final note asserts that 'The making of British Iron hath gradually decreased  in proportion to the increase of the importation of foreign' and the entire pamphlet, like the parliamentary evidence,  is  a  statement  of the  case  against  the  relaxation  of import controls.

What appears to be an earlier  version of this survey survives  among the papers of the Sussex  ironmaster  John Fuller, who noted that he had the account in I 71  7 from 'Mr Ray one  of  Mr Hussey's Partners', which seems to support Rea's claim to authorship against  knight'^.^ FulIer's list includes both furnaces and

lJournals  of the House o f Commons, xxn, 854, 20 April  1737, evidence of Spooner; ibid. XXIII, 09,  21 1 March 1738, n.s. evidence of Knight and Rea.

The Interest of Great Britain,  in supplying  herselfwith Iran:  Impartially  conrider'd (n.pl. n.d.). There are copies of this pamphlet in the Goldsmiths'  Library, London (Catalogue no. 9108, dated I 756) and the Kress Library, Harvard (Catalogue  no. 553  I,  also  dated I 756). The  title-page  and list offorges are  reproduced in facsimile  in  E. W. Hulme, 'Statistical  History  of  the Iron  Trade  of  England and  Wales, I 71  7-50', Transactions afthe Newcornen Society, M (1928-9), 24-5.

Science Museum Library, Weale MS, u (1798-181 ), no foliation. Hulme, loc. cit. prints the releI vant page in facsimile.

4 Sussex Archaeological Society  (Barbican House, Lewes), Fuller MS, RF/15/25, 'A List of all  the Furnaces  and Forges in England  and Wales, together  with a Computation  ofwhat Iron they are  supposed to make one year with another'. This document was first noticed i n print i n Herbert Blackman, 'Gun Founding at Heathfield in the XVIII Century', Sussex  Archaeological  Collections, LXVII  (1926); there is a transcript  in Hulme, loc. ut. 21-2. The Gwent County Archivist, Mr W. H. Baker, kindly informs me that his office has no papers of William Rea.

forges, arranged under counties from Brecon to Yorkshire as in the printed list, and names about a hundred forges producing  13,300 tons of bar annually. The four forges for which there are no output figures in the  1737 pamphlet are included, so that perhaps Fuller's list, or a contemporary variant of it, is the 'old List' referred to. Alongside the forges are names of some 60 blast-furnaces, for most of which outputs are given, producing I 8,190 tons of pig a year.

The number of blast-furnaces and the total output in the I 7  I 7 list have long been recognized as too 10w.l Furnaces known from other sources to have been working are  omitted, and  others  have  outputs  which  are  probably some  way below their true level.  Fuller himself noted  some underestimates and in I 738 Rea, in saying  that twenty years earlier pig output had been about 25,000  tons, may have been thinking of a revised version of the list. Modern work has confirmed this view  and, in particular,  Hammersley's calculations, based on the number  of furnaces in use in I 710-19  and their average output, without direct reference to Fuller's list, suggests a total output for England and Wales of about 25,000 tons for this decade, a figure which has been accepted here.

It  is more difficult  to be sure of the output of bar-iron at  this date, or any other for which estimates were produced, partly because of the more scattered nature of the industry and partly because of the more polemic character of the estimates. This is unfortunate, since contemporaries generally thought of the industry in terms ofthe output of bar-iron and tended to ignore the very small  foundry trade. On the other hand, for the purposes of long-run comparison the indispensable statistic is the output of pig-iron, which happens also to be the easier to estimate, and so here little has been said of bar-iron production.

Although no legislation resulted  from the inquiry  of  1737-8  the issue was revived in  1749 and, despite opposition from the trade, an Act was passed the following  year allowing the import of colonial bar into London on more favourable terms. Two lists offorges, with output estimates,  survive from this time. One is a printed list similar to that for  1736 and including outputs for most works outside the Weald, totalling  18,800 tons.2 A manuscript  survey, dating in its present form from  1787 but in origin an 'Account given in to Government in I 749', compiled by the Reverend Thomas Knight, lists forges under counties arranged topographically from Durham to the Weald, followed by Wales, and has two columns of output figures.a  One, alleged to be the output in I 750, totals I 3,350 tons; the other, presumably the output at some earlier date before the industry began to suffer from cheap imports, totals about 16,000 tons. In a third column appear details  of the contemporary state of each works, mostly either disuse or re-use  by some other industry, information dating, one assumes,  from I 787.

PP. 245-6. Hulme, loc. cit. 19-20, 23, 35; Ashton, op. cit. pp. 135-6; Hammersley, loc. cit. 594; Hyde, Thesis,

List o f the Forges in Englandand Wales; with  an Account o f the Qttantigv o f Bar-Iron the3 make annually according to  the  best Information  that could be gut on a strict Inquiry, Blanks being left  for the  Quantigv madeyearly at diyerent Places,  whereof we could not have a certain  Account. The Forges in Scotland  are not included ('.PI. n.d.)  (Kress, no. 4999; not in the Goldsmiths'  Library). Hulme, loc. cit. 27, prints a facsimile  ofthe  copy in the  British Library Reference  Division.  The  list  was almost certainly published in conjunction with a revised version of the I 737 pamphlet: Tfie  State o f the Trade and Manufactory o f Iron in Grent-Britain considered ( I 750), the title-page of which Hulme prints in  facsimile (p. 28).

Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Muirhead XI, 'List  ofthe different  Iron Works in England, Wales, Scotland &amp; Ireland to the Year I 794. Copied  from the Papers ofthc  latc Wm. Wilkinson Esq.'

446

Another list of this period was published by the metallurgist and ironmaster David Mushet ( I 772-1847) in  two early nineteenth-century papers.1 A summary of the document, including details of both furnaces and forges, has outputs of I 7,350 tons for pig-iron and I  2 , 0 6 0 tons for bar-iron; a fuller  version of the list of blast-hrnaces alone  contains  the same  figure for pig. The  form of the latter shows that the  estimates  were connected with the debate over  imports but to which year they relate isnot clear. In his collected papers Mushet dates the document to the year of the South Sea Bubble, presumably c. I 720, a date supported by Oddy,2 whereas in the Cyclopaedia the list of furnaces is not specifically  dated but said to refer to the period 'immediately before the introduction of pit-coal', by which, as he states elsewhere in the article, he means c. I 750. In practice, the date is of limited interest, since the output figures are so low that they may safely be disregarded.

After 1750 there appears to have been no attempt to calculate the output of the industry until the I 780's. In I 788 a fairly detailed survey was made, which includes the number and output of furnaces in each district, with separate totals for charcoal pig (26 furnaces producing I  4 , 5 0 0 tons) and coke pig (60 furnaces and 55,500 tons) . 3 For bar-iron there is a 'List of the Forges where the  method of making Bars upon the Old Plan still exists; with the number of Fineries and the Quantity of Iron which they annually make, taken on average-1 788', with a total output of 16,400 tons. By this date some 15,600 tons of bar were being produced annually by a coke-fired melting process, making a total for the entire industry of 32,000 tons. A separate list of 'Charcoal Blast Furnaces which have declined blowing since the Year I 750 owing either to the want of Wood or the introduction of making Coak Iron' dated I January I 788, without any output estimates, appears to be associated with the same survey.4

It is difficult to be sure of the year to which these estimates relate. Since the earliest version of the document is quite clear that the calculation was made in I 788, they can hardly refer to later than I 787, which is likely in any case in view of the insignificance of I 788 in the fiscal or political history of the industry. On the contrary, the material may have been collected as early as 1785 as part of the  ironmasters'  case  against the  freeing  of trade with Ireland. Early that year the ironmaster and merchant Alexander Raby told parliamentary committees considering  the  Irish  Propositions that  bar-iron  output  in  England  was  'From 25,000 to 30,000 Ton, and it is a Matter of great Increase'' and 'From Twenty thousand to Thirty thousand Ton yearly; and it is a very increasing arti~le'.~ Oddy also implies that the I 788 estimate had its origins  in the Irish controversy.6

- 1 David Mushet, Papers on Iron and Steel, Practical and Experimental (1840), p. 43; Abraham Rees, N e w Cyclojaedia or  Universal Dictionary o f Arts and Sciences, IV  (18rg),  art. 'Blast Furnace' (no pagination). See the preface to Papers on Iron and Steel for Mushet's authorship  of the latter article.
- J.  J. Oddy, European Commerce (1805),  p. 551.
- Science Museum Library, Weale MS, 11;  a variant of this list, printed by Mushet (Cyclopaedia) and most subsequent writers, includes only 59 coke furnaces producing  53,800 tons, which is hardly a significant discrepancy.
- 4 Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Muirhead II, loc. cit.
- 5  House of Lords Record Office, Main Papers, 1785, Evidence on Irish Commercial  Propositions,  16 June, evidence of Raby; House of Lords Library, Abbott Collection,  Accounts and Papers (1785), vm, Minutes of evidence of Irish Propositions, 227, evidence  of  Raby.
- Oddy, op. cit. p. 551.

Immediately afterwards came Eden's free-trade treaty with France (I  786) and among the pamphlets attacking this is one containing an estimate of 30,000 tons as the annual output of bar-ir0n.l It  would, however, be rash to identify the I 788 estimate with, say, I 785 or even earlier; it is probably better to see output rising fairly rapidly during the later I 780's,  so that by the end of the decade bar-iron production was running at perhaps 35,000 tons a year.

For pig-iron the picture  is clarified by  another list of  about  the same date among the papers of William Wilkinson.2  Like the 1788 list, from which they appear to derive, the 1791  estimates are not the result of  a furnace-by-furnace survey but  the sum of  county totals obtained by multiplying  the  number  of furnaces by an average output figure, which varies between charcoal and coke furnaces and between counties, implying a fair degree of expertise on the part of the unknown compiler.  The two lists, both dated 25 December I 791, total 90,204 tons of pig, made up of 80,704 tons of coke-smelted iron (from 85 furnaces) and 9,500 tons of charcoal pig from 22 furnaces. The calculations are explained as 'an estimate of  the  Quantity of  Pig  Iron they  may  be  supposed  to  make  at each of them 'Weekly, upon  an Average of  52 Weeks in a Year'' in the case of  coke pig,  and  'an Average of their produce  for the last 5 Years, &amp; which they may continue for the next 5 Years', for charcoal. In addition to the average annual output figure for each county used in the table, the coke list has another column headed 'Hawkins' Average', which contains similar figures rounded in most cases to the nearest hundred tons whereas  the others are  more precise. Hawkins is not further identified and his estimates appear not to be used in any stage of the calculation. To add to these contemporary estimates by deduction from indirect evidence means further multiplication of furnace sites by average output,  although since  eighteenth-century  furnaces are in  general  better  documented than those abandoned before I 700 it is possible to establish fairly closely when most were built or shut down. This is particularly true after Dr Hyde's detailed work on the industry during this period, which enables us to present estimates not  merely  for  average years in  each  decade  but  as  quinquennial averages (Table 2) .3

Choosing appropriate estimates of  average furnace output is more difficult. In  the period I 71 5-1 9, for which contemporary material suggests  that pig output was 25,000 tons a year, we may estimate that with about 74 furnaces in use the output of a single furnace would have been around 340 tons. At the other end of the period there is a sharp divergence between the 'Wilkinson' list of charcoal furnaces,  with an average output of only some 4-30 tons a year, and the ''Weale' list, used by Hyde, with an average of nearly 560 tons. There was undoubtedly some increasein furnace  productivity in  the eighteenth  ~entury.~Although  ne of no the major innovations in the iron industry of this period significantly affected

- A View of the  Treaty o f Commerce with  France: Signed at Versailles,  September 20, 1786, by Mr Eden ( I 7871, P. 27.
- Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Muirhead 11,  loc. cit.
- Hyde, Thesis, pp. 25%61; the base adopted for the series of estimates in the first column of Table 2 is I 785-9 = 24 , a compromise between the I 788 estimates of26 charcoal furnaces still working and  the I 791 estimate of22. This produces a figure O f   74  furnaces in use in I 715-19, which is the basis of the last line in Table I, above, p. 443.
- 4 For a general account ofthe iron industry in the eighteenth century see Hyde, Thesis, chs. 1 - 1 1 .

1720-89

448 PHILIP RIDEN Table 2. Estimated Output (tons) o f Pig-Iron i n Great Britain, b y Quinquennia,

|        | Furnaces   | Charcoal  pig  Average output   | Ttoal    | Furnaces   | Coke  pig  Average output   | Total   | Aggregate  output   |
|--------|------------|---------------------------------|----------|------------|-----------------------------|---------|---------------------|
| 1710-4 | 77         | 350                             | 27,000   |            |                             |         | 27,000              |
| 1725-9 | 82         | 355                             | 29,000   |            |                             |         | 29,000              |
| 1730-4 | 77         | 360                             | 28,000   |            |                             |         | 28,000              |
| '735-9 | 73         | 365                             | 27,000   |            |                             |         | 27,000              |
| 1740-4 | 71         | 3  70                           | 26,000   | -          |                             |         | 26,000              |
| 1745-9 | 71         | 375                             | 27,000   |            |                             |         | 27,000              |
| '750-4 | 68         | 380                             | 26,000   | 4          | 525                         | 2,000   | 28,000              |
| '755-9 | 63         | 390                             | 24,000   | I 1        |                             | 7,000   | 3  1,000            |
| 1760-4 | 57         | 395                             | 12,000   | 18         | 650                         | 12,000  | 34,000              |
| 1765-9 | 53         | 400                             | 21,000   | 26         |                             | 19,000  | 40,000              |
| 1770-4 | 42         | 405                             | I  7,000 | 30         | 775                         | 23,000  | 40,000              |
| '775-9 | 34         | 4'0                             | I 4 w o  |            | 840                         | 34,000  | 48,000              |
| 1780-4 |            |                                 | 12,000   | 56         |                             | 50,000  | 62,000              |
| 1785-9 | 24         | 425                             |          | 72         |                             | 70~000  | 80,000              |

Sources and methoak: The numbers of charcoal and coke furnaces i n use in each period have been calculated  from data in Hyde, Thesis, without  revision.  For charcoal  furnaces, lower  average  output  estimates have been used here than by Hyde, so that while the first and last aggregate  estimates remain similar (being based on contemporary aggregate  estimates as well as derived from manipulated  data), those i n between  rise less sharply before I 750 and fall less steeply  afterwards.  The discrepancy, however, between the two series remains within the range off 10 per cent. The coke-pig  estimates are almost identical to Hyde's but more detailed. For a fuller discussion  see pp. 442-9.

charcoal smelting there appears to have been a  gradual improvement in the productivity of the industry through  a process in which the furnaces that closed tended to be the older and smaller  ones  while those newly built between I 720 and I 750 were probably about as efficient as any then in use. After I 750, when no new charcoal furnaces were built, a similar process presumably led to the earlier closure of the smaller  furnaces, leading to a  steady increase in average output per furnace over the industry as a whole. Whether the average ever reached the level of  the 1788 estimate, however, seems questionable and here the more modest I 791 figure, which was intended to be an average over five years, apparently a broader base than that of the other series, has been adopted. In Table 2 average output figures for each five-year period between  I 720 and I 789 have been inserted by linear interpolation, which is  probably acceptable in the absence  of any specific innovation  which might have produced  a sharp,  once-for-all, gain in productivity.

Before I 750 only the three blast-furnaces owned by the Darbys at Coalbrookdale and 'Willey smelted iron with coke on a commercial scale and it is hardly necessary to calculate their output separately. Between I 750 and I 789, however, the rapid spread of coke smelting makes it desirable to distinguish the two types of pig and in Table 2 the average number of coke furnaces  in use in each five-year period is shown, together with an estimate of average furnace output. It  is fairly clear that the Darby furnaces produced about 500 tons a year, but it is difficult to be sure exactly how many furnaces were in use  around I 790 because the industry was expanding so rapidly. It may have been 80 or as many as 85.l The simplest  expedient, which makes little difference  to the final  estimate, is to take a round figure  of So furnaces in I 790 and attribute to them an output of I ,000 tons

a year, which is a little high but produces a total of 80,000 tons a year to coincide with the accurate I 791 survey. For intervening  years average output figures  have been inserted by linear interpolation)  assuming a  steady improvement in the productivity of the industry. There were important innovations in coke smelting in this period but it would be very difficult to quantify their impact convincingly.

I1

As well as the earlier material William Wilkinson's papers contain a detailed survey of the iron industry in I 794.1 Under county headings from Northumberland to the Weald and followed by other provinces of the British Isles, over I 20 works are named, together with the date of construction, the names of owner and occupier, whether the furnaces  were blown by water or steam, and whether coke or charcoal fired. No output estimates are given and so the survey is of limited value for present purposes, although it would be interesting to know why it was compiled.  Scrivenor,  in I 841,  printed a list  of coke and charcoal furnaces  in Great Britain, dated  May  I 790,  which seems to  be  a simplified version of  the  I 794 survey, since it includes the same kind of information but omits output.2  It adds nothing to the Wilkinson list and is of no great interest.

The estimates  of I 796, occasioned by the government's proposed excise of 20s. a ton on pig, are well known.3 In attempting to calculate the yield of such a tax, the Excise produced a figure of  167,312 tons from 107 furnaces in England and Wales, plus I 7 furnaces and I 8,300 tons in Scotland. The trade, in the form of a committee headed by Henry Gray MacNab, at first retaliated by reducing the England and Wales total  to  133,907 tons from  103 furnaces by  taking lower estimates for a number of works and eliminating four in North Wales altogether as no longer in use. They made no alteration to estimates for furnaces of which they had no direct knowledge, which included the  17 in Scotland, so that the total for Great Britain was reduced to 152,207 tons. Early in I 798 the trade produced a new set of figures, this time based on estimates from individual ironmasters, which, again from I 20  furnaces,  came to a total of I 25,079 tons, the most commonly accepted figure for this year.4 It  is clear, however, that this is an estimate of potential rather than actual output and assumed that furnaces would normally work for 52 weeks a year.5  Since we have 'actual' figures for only two furnaces  out of I 20 the total cannot be accurately deflated and  so around estimate of 120,000 for I 796 seems most sensible.

In his article in Rees's Cyclopaedia Mushet printed a list of 47 furnaces built or begun in the five  years following I 796, from which he extrapolated an additional output O f   47,000 tons over the I 796 figure.6  This is probably too low a multiplier

- Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Muirhead 11, loc. cit.
- Scrivenor,  op. cit. pp. 359-61. Ashton, op. cit. p. 175; Oddy, op. cit. p. 554.
- These statistics  can be found in Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Assay Office, Iron Trade Box, and Science Museum Library,  Weale MS; less sound versions are printed in Rees, Cyclopaedia, IV, art. 'Blast Furnace'.
- Derbyshire  Record Office, D.503, Butterley Co. letterbook, 5 March I 798 (no addressee  shown)  the : company forward details of output at Butterley and the nearby Morley Park Works for 1796. Butterley made 6824 tons in a campaign from I Jan.  to 23 Oct.; Morley Park 692 tons from I Jan.  to 5 Dec. The published outputs for these  works are  inflated  to the amount that would have been produced in a p w e e k campaign at the same  weekly average. '
- Rees, Cyclopaedia, IV, art. 'Blast Furnace'.

at a  time of rising productivity and an average of 1,250 or 1,300 tons seems reasonable, producing an estimate of 220,000 tons for 1802.

In March I  8 0 6 the government announced the introduction of a duty of 40s. a ton on pig and unleashed a new storm of opposition from the trade.1  The  government persevered but in the debate on the measure of g May their majority fell to under 20 . Four days later they moved that further consideration of the Bill be postponed and made it  clear that the  proposal had been abandoned.2  Both in the debate and in pamphlets produced by the trade an output of 250,000 tons was accepted by both sides and has generally been taken to be the level for 1806. Early versions of  the estimate,  however,  show  that  the figure is based  on  a furnace-by-furnace survey for the last available year,  which was 1805 rather than 1806. The sum of estimates from 236 furnaces in England, Scotland, and Wales, of which I 77 were in blast, was 242,707 tons, to which was added 7,800 tons as the estimated output of furnaces which failed to make returns, making a total of 250,507 tons. The  statistics are  set out  in a table which includes the name of each works and its owner, the number of furnaces in and out of blast, and the output of the works in I  8 0 5 , the whole survey having the appearance of careful compilation and considerable accuracy. It has been accepted here in favour of other estimates which have descended more widely through the literat~re.~

Five years later, when Henry Cort's son Richard petitioned Parliament for some reward for his father's inventions, the trade prepared a statement of the pig- and bar-iron then being made in Great Britain, with the results tabulated much as in 1806.~ The return lists 223 fwnaces, broken down by district, and notes that a further 45 were out of blast, but gives no furnace or district output figures. There is,  however,  a total  output  estimate of 530,000 tons,  of  which I  3 0 , 0 0 0 tons were bar-iron,  leaving a pig-iron total of 400,000 tons, which has been  accepted  here  without  question.  Between 1810 and 1823 there  are  no detailed  contemporary statistics and  only a  couple of round-figure  estimates (325,000 tons for 1818 and 368,000 tons for 1820) in modern sources for which original authority has  proved elu~ive.~ shet's  estimate of Mu 400,000 tons  for I  8 2 0 , with  a  notional  breakdown  between districts, was probably  better  informed, although by no means as accurate as surveys based on figures from individual furnaces.'

For  the 1820's there  is a good  deal of  contemporary  evidence. The most thorough survey appears to have been that made by Frederick Finch, M.P. for Walsall and 'an iron master and extensive mineral proprietor in Staffordshire', who undertook the task at the request of the government.'  The survey took the

- Ashton, op. cit. pp. I 75-7;  manuscripts  and pamphlets  in Birmingham  City Library,  Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Assay  Office, Iron  Trade  Box, and  Science Museum Library,  Weale MS; Parliamentary Debates, VI, 572.

- Science Museum  Library, Weale  MS; Birmingham  City  Library, Boulton &amp; Watt  Collection, Muirhead 11.  The discrepant estimates appear to result from omitting or double counting the estimated output of  furnaces which failed to make actual returns.
- Science Museum Library,  Weale MS.
- Iron, Steel and  Allied Trades  Federation, Statistical Refiortfor r g z 6 (1gr7),  p. 49 .
- Mushet, Papers on Iron and Steel, p. 413. '
- Richard Meade, The Coal and Iran Zndurtries ofthe United Kingdom (1882), 834; p. Refiort o f the Select

form of output estimates for the principal districts (South Wales, Staffordshire, Scotland, Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Shropshire, the north-east, and Scotland) for 1823 and 1830, together with the number of furnaces in each district (without distinguishing the number in blast) and the number built in each of the intervening years, with the fhrnaces and outputs listed individually for each works. The survey was made in I  8 2 5 and I  8 3 I and may have been intended to provide 'before and after' figures  to illustrate the effect of a substantial reduction in the duty on imported bar-iron in 1826.~ 1823, In which at first might seem an odd base year to choose, the industry had shrugged off the effects  ofthe postwar slump without  yet being caught by the boom of 1824-5. In the event, the document was  used  to  defend  the  ministry's commercial policy  generally and was  first referred to by Poulett Thompson in the Commons in 1832. He said then that he was laying the paper on the table of the house but it appears never to have been published officially.2 A lithographed version published in Birmingham,  probably in I  8 3 2 , may represent its first appearance in any form.3

For two intervening years there is a careful estimate by the statistician John Marshall (I  7 8 3 -  8 4 1 ) , 1 which  lists  furnaces  individually  under  district  subheadings, distinguishing the total number of furnaces at each works from the number  in  blast,  and giving output  figures for 1825 and 1828.~ Manuscript versions of the list include the note that 'nearly the whole of the Works in South Wales, Shropshire, and Staffordshire, also in Yorkshire and Derbyshire, were visited to obtain this return' and  in giving  evidence  to the 1833 Select Committee on Manufactures the Yorkshire ironmaster Samuel 'Walker  regarded Marshall's survey as equal in authority to  finch'^.^

Within a short time Finch's tables were recognized as slightly inadequate in that they  omitted the  minor iron-making districts of the  Forest of  Dean  and North Wales, and a revision by Marshall of the 1823 and I  8 3 0 surveys appeared with the addition of notional estimates for the smaller areas. Finch's figure for the number of furnaces in the main districts in 1823 was 259, to which Marshall added a further 18, making a total of 277, with a total output of 454,066 tons, including  a notional 12,000 tons for districts not  covered by  Finch. For 1825 Marshall lists 364 furnaces, of which 261 were in blast. In compiling an output series for Great Britain  these may be  refined to 362 and 259, since  Marshall included the two furnaces at  Arigna Ironworks, in Ireland, which were evidently revived in a year of exceptionally  high prices6  Two substantially discrepant output totals have descended from this survey, simply because Marshall included

Commitfee on Manufactures, Commerce andshipping (Parl. Papers, 1833 Sgo),  I), ( V evidence  of Samuel Walker, Q. 9577.

- Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Assay Office, Boulton Papers, Box I, no. 29. 4John Marshall, An Account of  the Rise, Progress and Present  Extent of the Production, Exportation and Consumption of Iron in Great Britain (1829).
- Birmingham City Library, Boulton &amp; Watt Collection, Assay Office, Doulton Papers, Box I, no. 29 (the  paper is endorsed  'July 1832, Mr  Finch',  in  manuscript),  and  Staffordshire Record  Office, D.695/1/9/81/1, Harward MS; S.C. on Manufactures (P.P. 1833), Q. 9577. '
- Marshall, op. cit. for the revised 1823 figures;  thc same author's Digest o f all the Accounts relating to the Population,  Productions, Revenues, Financial  Operations .  .  . o f the  United Kingdom (1833), pp. 32*-3* for the later series.

both a weekly average output and an annual total for each furnace, so that apart from a constant of 3,000 tons for Arigna there are two sets of district totals for Great Britain, one  making a national totaI of 581,367 tons, the  other, the  product of weekly totals multiplied by 52, no less than 613,236. With the removal of the Irish total these become 578,367 and 610,236 tons ofwhich the former has been adopted here.  For 1828 no weekly totals survive to complicate the issue and Marshall's figure  of 376 furnaces  with 277 in blast, and an  output of 702,584 tons, can be accepted unreservedly. Finally, for 1830, we may combine Finch's estimate of 360 furnaces producing 653,417 tons with Marshall's estimated 25,000 tons from an extra I  6 furnaces  in  other districts, to make a total for Great Britain of 678,417 tons from 376 furnaces.l

There is one other estimate for this period, of 690,000 tons  from 284 furnaces  in 1827, apparently first published in the Edinburgh Philosophid Mugueine in 1828 and quickly reprinted elsewhere, although it was not cited by Walker in 1833. Since it includes district sub-totals and some calculations as to the value of the output it seems  to be soundly  based.*

The limited  quality of  all these contemporary  figures means there is little point  in attempting to interpolate for missing years more closely than to the nearest ten thousand tons. This simplifies  the task appreciably, especially for the period I  7 9 0 - 1 8 0 5 , for which there are four reliable estimates and when output was clearly rising steadily. There is in any case little indirect evidence available for these years, and linear interpolation seems permissible. A useful source for later years is tonnage returns on canals in iron-making districts where fluctuations should reflect movements in the industry generally. Unfortunately, canal records sufficiently  detailed to give quantities of individual goods carried as well as total tonnage are sparse;3 before 1805 figures in the one series of any value, that for  the  Chesterfield  Canal,  serving the  northern  half  of  the  Derbyshire industryY4  re so small a (1,384 tons  in I  7 9 0 , rising  to 1, 9 9 4 tons in 1805) that local factors  could  seriously  distort  the  total. For  the  gap  between 1805 and 1810 figures from both the Chesterfield Canal and the Monmouthshire Canal'  show that about two-thirds of the increase came in 1808 and 1809 and the interpolation has been done on this basis.

The gap between 1810 and 1823, broken only by three unimpressive roundfigure estimates, presents more of a challenge. Hyde assembled a good deal of indirect evidence  for this period, mostly local or regional lists of furnaces with or without output estimates, plus the canal tonnage figures, to build up a national series.6 The method adopted here is simpler and is based merely on the canal data. The iron trade in Monmouthshire should reflect general trends in South

## Meade, op. cit. pp. 782-4.

- 2 Royal Commission on thecoal  Trade (P.P. 1871 (C. 43 5 ) , XVUI), 111, ; 58 British Almanac. 7 % Companim to the Almanac (1829), I  96; p. Mechanics' Magazine, XIII,  2  (24 35 July 1830) : J. Holland, Manufactures in Metal: Iron and Steel (1831), p. 75;  . W Needham, The  Manufacture of Iron (1831),  30. p.
- The relevant group in the Public Record  Office, RAIL, was searched  throughout;  I am  indebted also to Mr P. G. Rattenbury  of the Railway and Canal Kistorical Society  for information  from the society's index ofsources.
- Chesterfield  Reference  Library, L.5842, partly duplicated  by Sheffield City  Library, Jackson Collection, 1255.
- 6 Scrivenor, op. cit. (1854 edn), p. 127.
- Hyde, Thesis, app. K, 'Pig  Iron Output Estimates  for Great Britain, 1788-1860'~ 287-303. pp.

Wales, while the Chesterfield figures, although much smaller and more easily affected by  local factors,  should bear  some resemblance to movements in the inland districts.  The two series  were converted to index numbers and the pairs of index numbers averaged. Recalculating the averages as tons and rounding to the nearest ten thousand produced a series ending in 560,000 tons in 1823 , over a hundred thousand more than the Finch-Marshall  estimate. When the operation was repeated, with the Chesterfield  series  weighted by two-thirds to damp  down the effect of the much faster growth of the South Wales industry, the figure for I  8 2 3 emerged as 450,000 tons, coinciding with the contemporary estimate. The trend revealed by the manipulation is roughly similar to that produced by Hyde and also fits the literary evidence. In the absence of any other material it has been accepted and the three contemporary estimates abandoned. For other years the Monmouthshire figures  show that about three-quarters ofthe I  8 2 3 - 5 increase occurred in 1824, giving an interpolated estimate of 550,000 tons for that year, while the same source produces an estimate of 520,000 tons for 1826. For 1829 690,000 tons (which  falls between established  figures  of 700,000 tons for 1828 and 680,000 tons for 1830) seems unexceptionable.

Estimates  for the 1830's are not numerous. Samuel Walker told the I  8 3 3 Select Committee that at their Gloucester meeting the iron trade reckoned output in 1831 to have been about 5g0,ooo tons and he himselfsuggested a vaguer figure of 500,000 tons for 1832, while Sir John  Guest, giving evidence to the 1840 Select Committee on Import Duties, estimated production to have been about a million tons in 1835 and I '2 million in 1836.~ At the end of the decade Scrivenor, in his first edition, printed a table listing 378 furnaces producing 1,347,790 tons which 'we believe to be as correct an account of the quantity produced in 1839 as can be arrived at, considering  that part of it is necessarily estimated'. The previous year Mushet had published a similar table of 396 furnaces in blast, 14 2 out and 57 in course of construction, with an output in 1839 of 1,248,781 tons, which Scrivenor  included in a footnote. In 1854 Scrivenor  printed Mushet's table in the text, omitting his own altogether, and mainly for this reason Mushet's estimate has been accepted here. Both sets  offigures  were probably compiled  in connexion with a projected reduction in make in the first half of 1840  80 to per cent of the previous year's total.'

For I  8 4 0 we have a detailed estimate by William  Jessop of the Butterley Company of 492 furnaces (402 in blast) making 1,396,400 tons of pig, and for the following year another survey gives the average weekly output of the industry as 25,531 tons, or 1,327,612 tons a year at a time offull ~ o r k i n g . ~ In 1842 the trade tried to organize a  reduction in make of 20 per cent and  Andrew Faulds, secretary to the Yorkshire and Derbyshire ironmasters, drew up a statement of output in the main districts  in the  first  half  of I  4 2 8 of 5 2 3 , 2 I6 tons, or  I ,046,432 in a full  year, which Porter inflated to 1,099,142 tons, assuming the smaller districts had the same share of output as in 1840.~ The Mechanics' Maga&lt;ine thought that output

- Meade, op. cit. pp. 835-6; Mechanics'  Mugazim, XXXVI, 231 (19  March 18 4 2 ) .

454

had fallen to 75 per cent of the 1841 estimate, suggesting a figure of 1,062,090 tons;l perhaps it would be best to compromise at I ,080,000 tons. The recovery of the industry in the second half of the decade is easily charted. Porter gives a figure, apparently on good authority, of I ,215,350 tons from 339 furnaces  in blast in 1843, and another for 1848 of 2,093,736 tons fiom 452 hrnaces.* For 1847 there is a parliamentary return of 433 furnaces and 1,999,608 tons, while for three otherwise  unrecorded  years  we have  Richard  Taylor's estimates  of I  ,575,240 tons for 1844,  2,200,000 tons for 1845, and 2,214,000 tons for 1846, which seem plausible but have no obvious s ~ u r c e . ~   same is true of a figure of The 2,24g,ooo tons for 1850.~ Finally, the era of unofficial estimates closes with Braithwaite Poole's well-known table of 1852, with 497 furnaces  in blast producing 2,701,000 tons.'

For the  gap  between 1830 and I  839 it  is  difficult  to  differ  from  Hyde's estimates, based on regional totals themselves derived from indirect evidence,e which has been  adopted here without question, apart from rounding to the nearest ten thousand tons  (or, for 1831, rounding down to 600,000 tons in deference to Walker's estimate  of 590,000 tons, instead of taking the total up to 610,000). For 1849, 1851 , and 1853 estimates  have been inserted by linear interpolation.

In  1853 Northcote and Trevelyan, reporting on the  Museum of Practical Geology, commented that  "The  Mining Record Office is an interesting and valuable department of the institution. .  . But the produce of the iron, coal and some other important mineral substances  has not been ascertained, nor can the department be expected to obtain it with any accuracy, unless it is enabled to make systematic inquiries, by sending officers of its own to collect and organise informati~n.~~' ir recommendations led to the publication The two years later of the first  volume of Mineral Statistics, compiled by Robert Hunt, with data on the coal and iron industries combined with series for other mining industries previously published elsewhere.* The figures were based on information supplied voluntarily by the trade and were at first probably no more accurate than the best unofficial  estimates.  They presumably improved over  time, although as late as I 886 the influential S i r Lowthian Bell doubted their reliability.'  On the other hand, since the trade did not publish systematic statistics until 1878, with the appearance of the first  report of the British Iron Trade Association, compiled by J. S. Jeans,  one is left with no alternative but to accept the figures in Mineral Stdstics (Table 3).

- Mechanics'  Mag. XXXVI,  231 (19  March 1842).
- ?,Porter,  oc. cit. p. 118;  idem, l Progressoftheheation, ed. F. W. Hint (1912),  p. ?40:
- Scrivenor, op. cit. (1854  edn), p. 29511.;  . C. Taylor, R Statistics  ofcoal Distlibutzon in all Parts ofthe World (Philadelphia, 1848),  p. 330.
- 4 Iron, Steel and Allied Trades Federation, Statistical Report  for 1916 ( 1g17), . 49. p
- 5 Scrivenor, op. cit. (1854  edn),  p. 302. Hyde, Thais, app. K, pp. 303-13.
- Quoted, RuyalCommissbn on thecoal Trade (P.P. 1871), IEI, 5. 6
- 8 Robert Hunt, Memoirs of the Geological Suruey of  Great Bniain,  and of the Museum of Practical  Geology. Mining Recork. Mincral Statistus of  the United Kingdom of  Great Britain and Ireland (185542).
- I. L. Bell, The Iron  Trade of f k   nited U Kingdm (1886),  pp. I-?.

Table 3. Pig-Iron Production in Great Britain, I790-  I870

|        | T o n  s (000)   | T o n  s (000)   | Tons (o0o)   |
|--------|------------------|------------------|--------------|
| 1790   | 90               | 1830             | 680          |
|        | I 0 0            | 1831             | 600          |
| 1792   | I 0 0            | 1832             | 630          |
| I793   | I  I 0           | 1833             | 780          |
| '794   | I  I 0           | 1834             | 790          |
|        | 1  20            | 1835             | 930          |
| 1796   | I20              | 1836             | 970          |
| '797   | '40              | I837             | 1,030        |
| I798   | I  60            | 1838             | 1,120        |
|        | 170              | I  839           | 1,250        |
| 1800   | I  80            | 1840             |              |
| 18 0 1 | 200              | 184r             |              |
| 1802   | 220              | 1842             |              |
|        | 230              | 1843             |              |
| I  804 | 240              | 1844             |              |
| 1805   | 250              | I845             |              |
| I      | 270              | 1846             |              |
| 1807   | 290              | '847             |              |
| I  808 | 300              | 1848             |              |
| 809    | 350              | 1849             |              |
| 1810   | 400              | 1850             |              |
| 1811   | 360              | 1851             |              |
| 1812   | 360              | 1852             |              |
|        | 370              | 1853             |              |
| 1814   |                  | 1854             | 3.070        |
| 1815   | 340              |                  | 3,220        |
| 1816   | 2  70            | 1856             | 3,590        |
|        | 260              | I857             |              |
| 1818   | 280              | 1858             | 3,460        |
| 1819   | 280              |                  |              |
|        | 320              | I  8 6 0         |              |
| 1821   | 390              |                  | 3,710        |
| 1822   | 360              | I  862           | 3,940        |
| I  823 |                  | I  863           | 4,5I0        |
|        | 550              | 864              | 4,770        |
| I 825  | 580              | 86.5             | 4,800        |
| 1826   | 520              | I  866           | 4,520        |
| 1827   | 690              | I 867            | 4,760        |
|        |                  | I  868           |              |
| 1829   | 690              | I 869            |              |
|        |                  | 1870             | 5,960        |

Note: Figures in italics are based directly on contemporary estimates; others are interpolated.

Sources and  methodr: For a  critical  discussion  of  the original material  and methods of interpolation see pp. 449-54.  The resulting series is  broadly similar to that given by Hyde,Thesis, app. K, pp. 287-303,  for the same period;  slight discrepancies resulting from the  use  of different  original  texts or different  modes of interpolation rarely exceed the range off 10 per cent.

I t   is  hardly  possible to  discuss  here all  the  factors  which combined to  produce the data summarized in Fig. I or to examine in any detail their implications for general interpretations of the economic history of the period.  All that can be attempted is a brief summary of what appear to be the most interesting points.

Fig. I . The Output o f Pig-Iron in Great Britain, b y   Decades,  1530-9  to  1860-9

<!-- image -->

During the first forty years of large-scale blast-furnace production output rose very rapidly as the process  established  itselfin one district after another. The  rate ofgrowth then slackened  appreciably, although the trend remained upward until the first decade of the seventeenth century. After a slight recession the trend was resumed until the 1650's~ when growth was more sharply arrested for the next two decades. There was then a period of steady growth between the 1670's and I 740's~ which gave way to much more rapid expansion after I 750. Fig. I emphasizes that the middle of the eighteenth century was a turning-point of fundamental importance in the history of the industry, with very much faster growth after I 750 than at any time since the 1570's. Over the entire period, or alternatively from the 1570's onwards if one prefers to omit the strongly atypical first forty  years, the  decennial rate  of growth averaged I 8  per cent. This  can  be divided at the middle of the eighteenth century to show that while the rate between the 1570's and 1740's was just under 4 per cent, between the 1750's and 1860's it was a massive 60 per cent. If one seeks to choose a particular point at which the industry indisputably 'took off' into rapid and sustained growth, then it must be around I 750, the start of a century of unprecedented expansion.

The basic explanation of the two main discontinuities in the series is technological. The rapid growth of the sixteenth century can be seen  partly as the result of the substitution almost everywhere  of the more efficient blast-furnace for the bloomery, and partly as absolute expansion. The main impact of the introduction ofthe blast-furnace had evidently worked through by the 1570%. After this

date, apart from two interludes in the seventeenth century, where the evidence of the iron industry corresponds  with that from other branches of the economy,' output increased steadily but less through any major change in technique than as the result of expansion in the economy as a whole. The extent to which the industry could  benefit from  such expansion  was limited,  however, by competition from Baltic imports  which throughout the seventeenth century and  for most ofthe eighteenth  represented  slightly over  50  per  cent  of  total  sales of  bar-iron  in Britaim2  Compared with the Swedish and Russian industries, the British irontrade  was  a high-cost producer,  which,  even protected  by  a  stiff tariff,  was unable to increase  its  share  ofthe  domestic  market because ofhigh marginal costs. The higher cost of labour in England, coupled with a lack of important innovation in technique, was responsible, far more than any supposed scarcity of charcoal, for the sluggish record of the industry during this p e r i ~ d . ~

After I 720 it  is  possible to discuss  output  in more detail using the quinquennial estimates in Table 2.  Production increased in the I 720's~  declined in the I 73o's, and rose very slightly  in the I 74o's, before the major expansion of the I 750's got under way. This broadly confirms  the established  picture ofthe economy in these years,  with most ofthe  rather modest growth ofthe  first  halfofthe century coming in the first  two decades, which were followed by at least fifteen  years of stagnat i ~ n . ~  e absence of major technological change the increased output of the In th I 720's must be attributed to a growth in demand, as must that of the later I 740's. The depression of the I 730's  was shared by all branches ofthe economy, although the effect  on the iron industry was probably aggravated by a slight increase in the share of the market held by imports, which for the first time moved above 60 per cent.'

I t  has  been  suggested that the  'agricultural  depression'  of the  1730's and I 740's may indirectly have benefited industry, since a period of cheap food without a fall  in real wages should  have released purchasing power to increase sales of manufactured goods.6  This may have been true of some industries but in the iron trade the fall  in  demand for goods by farmers and others suffering  from low prices in agriculture evidently outweighed any benefit derived from a redistribution of income in favour of wage-earners.'

Although Abraham Darby had successfully used coke as a fuel in his blastfurnace at Coalbrookdale  by I 718, if not earlier, the unsuitability ofpig produced with coke for conversion into bar, the form in which most iron was sold at this

- For this period generally  see  B. E. Supple, CommercialCrisis andchange in England, 1600-42 (Cambridge, 1959).

- Hammersley, loc. cit. 612-3, and M. W. Flinn, Men o f Iron.  The Cr o w l e y s   i n the Early Iron  Industry (Edinburgh, 1962), pp. 4-5, discuss this view morefully.
- Deane and Cole, op. cit. p. 61  G. E. Mingay, 'The  Agricultural Depression, ; I 730-50',  Econ. Hist. Rev. 2nd ser. VIII  (1955-6), 323-38. '
- Schumpeter, op. cit. pp. 53-4 and Table P.
- This is the  view developed  by A. H. John in, for example, 'Aspects  ofEnglish Economic  Growth in  the ' First Halfofthe  Eighteenth Century', Econornica, XXVIII  (1961),  176-90.
- Or alternatively, a high leisure  preference among wage-earners  may have negated the income effect ofsuch a redistribution, as suggested  by Deane  and Cole, op. cit. pp. 93-4.

458

date,  meant  that  few  ironmasters  adopted  Darby's  technique.1 However,  a modification  by his  son about I 750, to  produce an  iron which could compete with charcoal pig in the bar-iron trade,  combined with an increase in demand for cast  iron, for which coke pig had from the start been more suitable, led to a sharp upturn in output in the I 750's and I 760's.~ Output was further stimulated by the use of steam power and cylinder bellows in place of water power and leather bellows as a means ofblowing furnaces,' and by the  final  substitution  in  the I 780's of coke for charcoal throughout the refining pro~ess.~

The impression conveyed by Fig. I is one of much faster growth between I 750 and 1770 than at any time during the previous century and a half, with output rising from under 30,000 tons a year to about 40,000. This was followed by a slight pause in the early I 7707s, giving way after I 775 to a long period of faster growth which continued to a peak of 400,000 tons in 1810. There can be little doubt that this was stimulated initially by the adoption ofcoke smelting  but beyond this it  would be hazardous to assign greater importance either to innovation within the industry or to growth in the economy generally. It  is clear, however, as with the period before 1750, that home demand was more important than exportsY6  nd that the direct impact of war on the industry was less than a might have been expected. It  is difficult to detect any upturn in the  rate of growth after I 792, either in the quinquennial estimates or in the annual series starting in I 790 (Table 3). On the other hand, the effect of the war on the economy as a whole may have benefited the iron trade indirectly.6

The fortunes of the industry after I 8  I o can be summarized very briefly, since the main outlines of the economy  in this period are well known and these figures do not upset the established view. Output ceased to rise after 1810, faltered for a few years, and then fell sharply to a trough of 260,000 tons in I 81 6. An unsteady recovery followed, reaching a peak of 580,000 tons in 1825. A depression  in 1826 was followed by a surprisingly rapid recovery in the late I  820's~ interrupted by the depression  of 183  1-2 but otherwise extending throughout most of the 1830%. A peak of I  - 4 million tons in 1840 was followed by a slump in 1842-3, but later in the decade the industry expanded very fast to reach a new peak of 2 - 5 million tons in 1851. The 1850's and 1860's~ in the iron trade as in the economy as a whole, were years of steady, unspectacular growth, succeeded, at the very end of the period, by the boom which reached its climax in 1873 at over 6-5 million tons.

The industry experienced few major innovations in technique between the introduction of puddling in I 783-4, and 1870. Cort's original 'dryy7 puddling

- For a recent  synthesis  ofthe extensive  literature  on  Darby's  innovation see B. S.  Trinder, T171e Industtdal Revohtiun in Shropshire (London and Chichester, 1973), pp. 20-5; for the lack ofdiffusion before 1750  see M. W. Flinn, 'William Wood and the Coke-Smelting Process',  Truns. Newcornen  SOC. XXXIV  (1961-2), 6C9.
- Trinder, op. cit. pp. 33-47; Hyde, Thesis, pp. 57-8.
- The best account  of this is probably  still  John Farey, A  Treatise on the Steam Engine (1827),  pp. 269-89. 4 G. R. Morton and N. Mutton, 'The Transition to Cort's Puddling  Process',Jcumal ofthe Iron and Steel Institute, ccv (1967),  7224.
- 5 Calculated  from  data in Schumpeter,  op. cit. pp. 23-8 and Table 2 .
- 6 For a recent study of the impact of the Napoleonic War see Glen Hueckel, 'War and the British Economy, 1793-1815: A General Equilibrium Analysis', Explorations in  Economic  Histmy, x  (1972-3), 365-96;  and for government spending J. L. Anderson, 'A Measure of the Effect of the British Public Finance, 1793-1815', Econ. Hist. Rev. zndser. xxvn (r974), 610-19.

process was superseded in the 1820's by  Joseph Hall's 'wet' puddling,l and after 1830 most furnaces came to be blown with air heated above atmospheric temperature.2 'Hot blast',  apart from improving furnace output, made possible for the first time the use of raw coal instead of coke in smelting, which led in particular to the spectacular growth of the Scottish iron industry in the second quarter of the century.  I t  can hardly be  said, however, that  any nineteenthcentury innovation produced a substantial  increase  in output easily detectable in Table 3, where the familiar succession  of troughs and peaks  is more obvious  than movements attributable to technical change in the industry. At the same time, it is difficult  to think of any area of demand from which the iron industry might have benefited disproportionately in these years, except perhaps the sharp increase in output in the I 840's, when the production of railway goods was particularly irnp~rtant.~

Such are the main features of the output of the iron industry in the long run. Although, especially before 1790, one can hardly claim great accuracy for the figures,  they do make possible more detailed analysis of the industry over a much longer  period  than  previously.  The series contains two major  discontinuities attributable  to fundamental changes in technique,  but between these,  and to some extent after the second, it reveals not so much the impact of minor changes in technology as movements in the economy as a whole, or, in other words, changes in the demand for iron originating outside the industry. Thus, if this article has any one general implication, it is perhaps that studies of particular sectors  of the economy, such as  individual  industries, should  concentrate less  than has often been the case on technological  change within the industry and more on the effect of changes  in the economy as a whole on the sector under examination.

## University College, Carday

- W. K. V. Gale, The British Iron and Steel Industry. A  Technical  History (Newton  Abbot, 1967), pp. 62-4. C. K. Hyde, 'The Adoption of the Hot Blast by the British Iron Industry: A Reinterpretation', Expl. Econ. Hist. x (ICJ~Z-~),  -93. 281
- G. R. Hawke, RailwaysandEconomic Growth inEnglandand Wales, 1840-70 (Oxford, rg7o), pp. 213-59; B.   R. Mitchell,  'The  Coming  ofthe Railway  and United Kingdom Economic Growth',Jounzal ofEconomic History, xx~v (rg64),  315-36; and Wray Vamplew, 'The  Railways  and the Iron Industry: A Study oftheir Relationship in Scotland', in M. C. Reed,  ed. Railways in the  Victorian Economy. Studies in Finance  and Econmnic Growth (Newton Abbot, 1969),  pp. 33-75, all attempt to measure  the impact ofrailway demand on the iron industry.