IZA DP No. 2621

Innovation and Employment: A Survey

Marco Vivarelli

February 2007

<!-- image -->

## Innovation and Employment: A Survey

## Marco Vivarelli

Università Cattolica Piacenza, CSGR Warwick, Max Planck Institute of Economics Jena and IZA

Discussion Paper No. 2621 February 2007

IZA

P.O. Box 7240 53072 Bonn Germany

Phone: +49-228-3894-0 Fax: +49-228-3894-180 E-mail: iza@iza.org

This paper can be downloaded without charge at:

http://ssrn.com/abstract=969621

An index to IZA Discussion Papers is located at:

http://www.iza.org/publications/dps/

Any opinions  expressed  here  are  those  of  the  author(s)  and  not  those  of  the  institute.  Research disseminated by IZA may include views on policy, but the institute itself takes no institutional policy positions.

The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) in Bonn is a local and virtual international research center and a place of communication between science, politics and business. IZA is an independent nonprofit company supported by Deutsche Post World Net. The center is associated with the University of Bonn and offers a stimulating research environment through its research networks, research support, and visitors and doctoral programs. IZA engages in (i) original and internationally competitive research in all  fields  of  labor  economics, (ii)  development of policy concepts, and (iii) dissemination of research results and concepts to the interested public.

IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. Citation  of  such  a  paper  should  account  for  its  provisional  character.  A  revised  version  may  be available directly from the author.

IZA Discussion Paper No. 2621 February 2007

## ABSTRACT

## Innovation and Employment: A Survey

According to the "compensation theory", market forces should assure a complete compensation  of  the  initial  labour-saving  impact  of  process  innovations.  In  this  paper  a critique  of  this  approach  is  proposed  through  a  detailed  survey  of  the  theoretical  and empirical literature on the subject. The general conclusion is that - although compensation is always working - the complete counter-balancing of dismissed workers cannot be assumed ex-ante.

JEL Classification:

J64, O33

Keywords:

innovation, technological unemployment, compensation

Corresponding author:

Marco Vivarelli Facoltà di Economia Università Cattolica Via Emilia Parmense 84 I-29100 Piacenza Italy

E-mail: marco.vivarelli@unicatt.it

## 1. INTRODUCTION

The diffusion, in the last two decades, of a new 'technological paradigm' based on ICTs has implied a new emergence of the old debate about the possible employment consequences of innovation.

Indeed, the fear of technological unemployment has always emerged in ages characterised by radical technological changes. For instance, the striking response of the English workers to the first industrial revolution was the destruction of machines under the charismatic lead of Ned Ludd in the industrial areas and of Captain Swing in the countryside (see Hobsbawm, 1968; Hobsbawm and Rudé, 1969).

On the other hand, since its very beginning, the economic theory has pointed out the existence of economic  forces  which  can  compensate  for  the  reduction  in  employment  due  to  technological progress. Since the classical debate, two views have started to compete in dealing with the employment impact of technological progress: using Ricardo's words, the "working class opinion" was characterised by the fear of being dismissed because of innovation (see Ricardo, 1951, p. 392), whilst the academic and  political  debate  was  mainly  dominated  by  a  ex-ante  confidence  in  the  market  compensation  of dismissed workers.

Even nowadays - mutatis mutandis - the nature of the different long-term 'technological trajectories' can  be  of  paramount  importance  in  explaining  national  and  regional  differences  in  employment  and unemployment trends. Obviously, this does not mean that short-term views focusing on prices (wages and interest rates) or on labour market regulation are not important, but they are probably insufficient in providing a complete interpretation of employment evolution.

In this chapter a classical framework (Section 2) will be provided, criticized (Section 3) and used in giving account of the empirical evidence (Section 4). Main findings and conclusions will be discussed in the final Section 5. While this chapter will be mainly devoted to a macroeconomic analysis, the reader interested into the microeconomic aspects of the relationship between innovation and employment can refer to Piva and Vivarelli (2003 and 2004).

## 2. THE CLASSICAL'COMPENSATION THEORY'

The economic discipline - since its foundation and as a part of the heroic attempt to render economics a proper 'science' - has tried to dispel all concerns about the possible harmful effects of technological progress, on a basis of a rigorous, counter-intuitive and 'scientific theory'. Indeed, in the first half of the XIX century economists put forward a theory that Marx later called the "compensation theory" (see Marx,  1961,  vol.  1,  chap.  13  and  1969,  chap.  18).  This  theory  is  made  up  of  different  market compensation  mechanisms  which  are  triggered  by  technological change  itself and  which  can counterbalance the initial labour-saving impact of process innovation (for an extensive analysis, see also Vivarelli, 1995, chaps.2 and 3; Petit, 1995; Vivarelli and Pianta, 2000, chap. 2; Pianta, 2004).

## A) The compensation mechanism "via new machines".

The same process  innovations  which  displace  workers  in  the  user  industries,  create  new  jobs  in  the capital sectors where the new machines are produced (see, for instance, Say, 1964, p.87).

## B) The compensation mechanism "via decrease in prices".

On the one hand, process innovations involve the displacement of workers; on the other hand, these innovations themselves lead to a decrease in the unit costs of production and - in a competitive market this  effect  is  translated  into  decreasing  prices;  in  turn,  decreasing  prices  stimulate  a  new  demand  for products and so additional production and employment. This mechanism was singled out at the very beginning of the history of the economic thought (Steuart, 1966, vol. II, p.256).

This line of reasoning became the cornerstone of the compensation theory when Say's law became the focus of classical economic theory (see Say, 1964, p.87). In a competitive world, the supply generates its own demand and technological change fully takes part in this self-adjusting process.

The compensation mechanism "via decrease in prices" has been re-proposed many times in the history of economic thought both by neoclassical economists (see Pigou, 1962, p.672) and by modern theorists

(see  Neary,  1981;  Stoneman,  1983,  chaps.  11  and  12;  Hall  and  Heffernan,  1985;  Dobbs,  Hill  and Waterson, 1987; Nickell and Kong, 1989; Smolny, 1998).

## C) The compensation mechanism "via new investments".

In a world where the competitive convergence is not instantaneous, it is observed that during the gap between the decrease in costs - due to technological progress - and the consequent fall in prices, extraprofits  may  be  accumulated  by  the  innovative  entrepreneurs.  These  profits  are  invested  and  so  new productions  and  new  jobs  are  created.  Originally  put  forward  by  Ricardo  (1951,  vol.  I,  p.396),  this proposition has also been called forth by neo-classicals like Marshall (1961, p.542) and by more recent dynamic  models  such  as  those  by  Hicks  (1973),  Stoneman  (1983,  pp.  177-81).  The  role  of  lagged innovation  in  fostering  employment  evolution  is  also  investigated  in  Van  Reenen  (1997)  at  a microeconomic level.

## D) The compensation mechanism "via decrease in wages".

As  with  other  forms  of  unemployment,  the  direct  effect  of  labour-saving  technologies  may  be compensated within the labour market. In fact, in a neoclassical framework - with free competition and full  substitutability  between  labour  and  capital  -  technological  unemployment  implies  a  decrease  in wages and this should lead to a reverse shift back to more labour-intensive technologies. The first to apply  this  kind  of  argument  was  Wicksell  (1961,  p.137),  followed  by  Hicks  (1932,  p.56)  and  Pigou (1933, p.256).

In modern times, the wage adjustment is a component of partial equilibrium models such as those by Neary (1981) and Sinclair (1981) and general equilibrium analyses such as those by Layard and Nickell (1985), Venables (1985), Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1991), Davis (1998) and Addison and Teixeira (2001).

E) The compensation mechanism "via increase in incomes".

Directly in contrast with the previous one, this compensation mechanism has been put forward by the Keynesian and Kaldorian tradition. In a Fordist mode of production, unions take part in the distribution of the fruits of technological progress. So it has to be taken into account that a portion of the cost savings due to innovation can be translated into higher income and hence higher consumption. This increase in demand leads to an increase in employment which may compensate the initial job losses due to process innovations (see Pasinetti, 1981; Boyer, 1988B, 1988C and 1990).

## F) The compensation mechanism "via new products".

Technological change is not only process innovation, but it can imply the birth of entirely new economic branches  where  additional  jobs  can  be  created.  Once  again,  the  labour-intensive  impact  of  product innovation was underlined by classical economists (Say, 1964, p.88) and even the most severe critic of compensation  theory  admitted  the  positive  employment  benefits  which  can  derive  from  this  kind  of technological progress (Marx, 1961, vol. I, p.445).

In  the  current  debate,  various  studies  (Freeman,  Clark  and  Soete,  1982;  Freeman  and  Soete,  1987; Freeman and Soete, 1994; Vivarelli and Pianta, 2000; Edquist, Hommen and McKelvey, 2001) agree that  product  innovations  have  a  positive  impact  on  employment  since  they  open  the  way  to  the development of either entire new goods or main differentiation of mature goods. The 'labour-friendly nature' of product innovation turns out to be particularly obvious at the microeconomic level (see, for instance, Entorf and Pohlmeier, 1990; and Brouwer, Kleinknecht and Reijnen, 1993)

## 3. A CRITIQUE

On the one hand, technological change induces market forces which can potentially counterbalance the initial labour- saving effect of process innovation. In addition, a different form of technological progress - namely the diffusion of new products - can have a positive effect on employment trends.

On the other hand, compensation mechanisms can be hindered by the existence of drawbacks which are often  either  neglected  or  mis-specified  by  the  neo-classical  conventional  wisdom.  Using  the  same taxonomy  which  has  been  proposed  above,  the  main  criticisms  of  the  compensation  theory  can  be singled out as follows.

A) With few exceptions (see Hicks, 1973), nowadays this compensation mechanism is not put forward anymore. Indeed, Marx's critique of this mechanism was particularly sharp:

- "...the machine can only be employed profitably, if it...is the (annual) product of far fewer men than it replaces". (Marx, 1969, p.552)

Moreover,  labour-saving  technologies  spread  around  in  the  capital  goods  sector,  as  well;  so  this compensation is an endless story which can be only partial (Marx, 1969, p.551).

Finally, the new machines can be implemented either through additional investments (see point C) or simply by substitution of the obsolete ones (scrapping). In the latter case - which is indeed the most frequent one - there is no compensation at all (see, for instance, Freeman, Clark and Soete, 1982).

B) As originally noted by Malthus (1964, vol. II; pp. 551-60), Sismondi (1971, p.284) and Mill (1976, p.97), the very first effect of a labour-saving technology is a decrease in the aggregate demand due to the cancellation of the demand previously associated with the dismissed workers. So, the mechanism "via decrease  in  prices"  deals  with  a  decreased  demand  and  has  to  more  than  counterbalance  the  initial decrease in the aggregate purchasing power.

In addition, this mechanism relies on Say's law and does not take into account that demand constraints might occur. Difficulties  concerning  the  components of the "effective demand" - in Keynes' terms such as a low value of the "marginal efficiency of capital" (see Keynes, 1973, chap. 11) can involve a delay  in  expenditure  decisions  and  a  lower  demand  elasticity.  If  such  is  the  case,  this  compensation mechanism is hindered and technological unemployment ceases to be a temporary problem.

Finally, the effectiveness of the mechanism "via decrease in prices" depends on the hypothesis of perfect competition. If an oligopolistic regime is dominant, the whole compensation is strongly weakened since cost savings are not necessarily and entirely translated into decreasing prices (see Sylos Labini, 1969, p.160).

- C) Also the compensation mechanism "via new investments" relies on the Say's law assumption that the accumulated  profits due to innovation are entirely and  immediately  translated into additional investments.  Again,  Marx's  and  Keynes's  treatment  of  Say's  law  can  be  used  to  doubt  the  full effectiveness of this compensation mechanism. Moreover, the intrinsic nature of the new investments does matter; if these are capital-intensive, compensation can only be partial:

"The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have seen, under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, under a constant increase of its constant, at the expense of its variable constituent" (Marx, 1961, vol. I, p.628).

- D)  Also  the  mechanism  "via  decrease  in  wages"  contrasts  with  the  Keynesian  theory  of  effective demand. On the one hand, a decrease in wages can induce firms to hire additional workers, but - on the other hand - the decreased aggregate demand lower employers' business expectations and so they tend to hire less workers.

A  second  criticism  can  be  launched  to  this  mechanism  if  the  cumulative  and  irreversible  nature  of technological change is properly taken into account (see Rosenberg, 1976; Dosi, 1988). In this view, science and technology have  their own  rules: along a "technological trajectory" a "localised technological  progress"  occurs.  If  the  cumulative  and  localised  nature  of  innovation  is  taken  into account,  both  the  hypothesis  of  perfect  substitutability  between  capital  and  labour  assumed  by neoclassical models and the possibility of a reverse in technological change appear to be quite unlikely.

E) During the "golden age" of the '50s and '60s the Fordist mode of production was based on a relevant change in the labour-wage nexus. Instead of leaving the wage to be regulated by a competitive labourmarket,  workers  were  allowed  to  take  possession  of  a  relevant  portion  of  productivity  gains  due  to technological progress. In turn, the increased real wages involved mass consumption and this stimulated investments  leading  to  further  productivity  gains  through  innovation  and  scale  economies  (Boyer, 1988A). Labour-saving technologies were introduced on large scale, but the Kaldorian "virtuous circle" allowed an important compensation "via new incomes".

Nowadays, the Fordist mode of production is over for many reasons that cannot be discussed here (see Boyer 1988A and 1990). The distribution of income follows different rules (based more on Phillips' curve than on sharing the productivity gains) and labour markets have returned to be competitive and flexible.  On  the  whole,  this  compensation  mechanism  has  been  strongly  weakened  in  the  new institutional contexts (see Appelbaum and Schettkat, 1995).

F) New products are still the more powerful way to counterbalance labour-saving process innovations. Yet, the "welfare effect" (new branches of production) has to be compared with the "substitution effect" (displacement of mature products; see Katsoulacos, 1986). Moreover, different "technological paradigms" are characterised by different clusters of new products which in turn have very different impacts  on  employment.  So,  the  introduction  of  the  automobile  had  a  much  higher  labour  intensive effect than the diffusion of the home computers. As a matter of fact, in different historical periods and different  institutional  frameworks,  the  relative  balance  between  the  labour-saving  effect  of  process innovations and the labour-intensive impact of product ones can considerably vary.

A well-balanced conclusion about the compensation theory can be taken from Pasinetti (1981, p.90):

"For the time being, we may draw the important conclusion that the structural dynamics of the economic system inevitably tend to generate what has rightly been called technological unemployment. At the same time, the very same structural dynamics produce counter-balancing movements which are capable of bringing macro- economic condition...towards fulfilment, but not automatically".

## 4. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE.

The "classical taxonomy" discussed above can also be applied to the present forms of technological change  and  particularly  to  the  introduction  and  diffusion  of  ICTs.  Yet,  taking  into  account  the discussion in the previous sections, it is  obvious that economic theory cannot provide a clear-cut answer about the employment effect of ICTs. Hence, attention should be turned to aggregate, sectoral and microeconomic empirical analyses which should take into account the different forms of innovation, their direct effects on labour, the various compensation mechanisms and the possible hindrances to these mechanisms.

Of course, this is not an easy task. Whilst theoretical economists may develop clear models about the employment  impact  of  process  and  product  innovation,  applied  economists  have  "to  measure" technological change, the compensation mechanisms and the final employment impact of innovation; from this respect, at least three main problems arise.

First,  technological  change  in  general  and  ICTs  diffusion  in  particular  are  difficult  to  measure; traditional indicators such as R&amp;D (input indicator), patents and crucial innovations (output indicators) are seldom fully available and are often inadequate to fully represent technological change (think - for instance - to the role of tacit knowledge and intangible investments in fostering ICTs diffusion).

Second, as discussed in Section 2, the final employment impact of innovation depends on institutional mechanisms which can be very different at the micro, sectoral and macro levels and can vary in different contexts, such as in different countries or different sectors within the same country.

Third,  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the  final  impact  of  innovation  on  employment,  since  the  latter  is influenced  by  many  other  factors:  the  macroeconomic  and  cyclical  conditions,  the  labour  market dynamics and regulations, the trends in working time and so on.

In addition to these general shortcomings, there are also problems which arise at each level of analysis.

Starting from the microeconomic studies, the empirical analysis of the impact of ICTs at the firm's level is extremely useful in revealing the actual ways how new products generate new jobs and labour-saving process  innovation  destroy  old  ones.  Nevertheless,  the  main  shortcoming  of  this  kind  of  analysis consists  in  a  "positive  bias"  which  tends  to  underline  the  positive  employment  consequences  of innovation. In fact, once the empirical analysis is developed at the level of the single firms, innovative firms tend to be characterised by the better employment performances since they gain market shares because  of  innovation.  Even,  when  the  innovation  is  labour-saving,  these  analyses  generally  show  a positive  link  between  technology  and  employment since they do not take into account the important effect on the rivals, which are crowded out by the innovative firms (the so-called "business stealing" effect, see Van Reenen, 1997; Piva and Vivarelli, 2003). For instance, Greenan and Guellec (2000) using  data  from  French  manufacturing  sectors  over  the  period  1986-90  -  found  out  a  positive relationship  between  innovation  and  employment  at  the  firm's  level  (both  product  and  process innovation). Yet, at the sectoral level, their results confirmed the idea that only product innovation create additional jobs, while process innovation generate jobs within the innovative firm but at the expense of the competitors, leading to an overall negative effect at the sectoral level.

This bias can be corrected when the empirical analysis is carried out at the sectoral level: in this case, a researcher  can  take  into  account  both  the  positive  performance  of  innovative  firms  and  the  indirect effects on the competitors and so he can investigate the final employment outcome. Yet, also sectoral analyses can be affected by either a negative or a positive bias according to the observation point of view (manufacturing vs services). For instance, Pianta (2000) and Antonucci and Pianta (2002) found an overall  negative  employment  impact  of  technological  change  in  manufacturing  industries  across  five European  countries,  while  Evangelista  (2000)  and  Evangelista  and  Savona  (2002)  found  a  positive employment relationship in the most innovative and knowledge intensive service sectors and a negative one in the case of financial-related sectors and most traditional services like trade and transports.

Finally, even at the sectoral level, the analysis cannot take into account all the direct and indirect effects of  technological  change.  Only  the  aggregate  macroeconomic  studies  can  jointly  assess  1)  the  labour

displacement  of  process  innovation  in some  economic  sectors  (mainly  manufacturing);  2)  the compensation  effects  which  operate  within  those  sectors  (through  decreasing  prices  and  increasing investments) and in other sectors (through intersectoral flows of products and incomes); 3) the positive employment impact of product innovation in other sectors (mainly services). Yet, aggregate empirical analyses are very difficult to put forward because of the three main general problems discussed above.

Keeping  these  methodological  remarks  in  mind,  attention    will  now  be  focused  on  empirical contributions at the macroeconomic level, starting from input-output models.

Leontief and Duchin (1986) used input-output matrices to test the employment impact of automation assuming  four  different  scenarios  (characterised  by  different  paces  of  technological  change).  The authors  carried  out  their  simulations  taking  future  demand  evolution  as  exogenous.  While  all  four simulations led to an increasing employment trend, the study revealed a clear labour-saving bias of new

technologies: in fact, more accelerated technological progress implied lower employment growth rates.

Whitley and Wilson (1982 and 1987) put forward a multisectoral dynamic model explicitly addressed to studying the employment impact of technological change using a compensation framework. In their first study, the two authors forecasted employment levels in 1990 for most sectors of British economy and in their simulation compensation mechanisms were able to more than compensate initial job losses due to process innovation. Among the compensatory forces, the mechanism via decrease in prices resulted the more effective, accounting for more than 50% of compensation of the initial labour displacement. In their  second  study,  the  simulation  scenario  moved  to  the  period  1985-95  and  also  took  into  account office automation and the public sector. In this case, compensation turned out to be only partial with an overall  effect  of  new  technologies  equal  to  288,000  job  losses  within  British  economy.  At  any  rate, compensation mechanisms resulted effective  in  counterbalancing  280,000  initial  job  losses  and  most effective mechanisms appeared those "via decrease in prices" and "via new investments".

Very close in spirit to Whitley and Wilson's model, is the framework proposed by Kalmbach and Kurz (1990). Their simulation of the impact of "microelectronic-based best-practice techniques" on the West

Germany economy showed compensation mechanisms at work, but unable to fully compensate for the initial labour displacement due to ICTs diffusion.

Again about West Germany is the input-output study by Meyer-Krahmer (1992): using data referring to 51 sectors covering the entire economy in the '80s, the author emulated the employment reaction of German economy to innovation (in house R&amp;D spending and purchased R&amp;D knowledge - spillovers).

His  econometric  results  support  the  view  that  technological  progress  implies  overall  labour-saving effects;  yet  important  sectoral  differences  emerge:  while  purchased  R&amp;D  involves  job  losses  in industries  like  textile,  clothing  and  electronic  equipment,  in  house  R&amp;D  stimulates  the  demand  for labour in sectors like chemicals and computer industries.

Departing from input-output models, two other streams of empirical literature can be singled out. On the one hand, some econometric studies within the "compensation approach" (see Section 2) tried to test the validity of (some) compensation mechanisms within a partial or general equilibrium framework. On the other hand, more recent studies turned the attention either to the direct relationship between growth and employment, or to aggregate macroeconomic models.

Sinclair (1981), Layard and Nickell (1985) and Nickell and Kong (1989) belong to the first group of studies.  In  the  first  contribution  Sinclair  put  forward  a  macro  IS/LM  scheme  and  concluded  that  a positive  employment  compensation  can  occur  if  the  demand  elasticity  and  the  elasticity  of  factor substitution are sufficiently high. Using estimates based on US data, the author found a strong evidence supporting the mechanism via decrease in wages but not the mechanisms via decrease in prices.

Layard and Nickell (1985) derived a demand for labour in a quasi-general equilibrium framework and stated that the crucial parameter was the elasticity of the demand for labour in response to a variation in the  ratio  between  real  wages  and  labour  productivity;  in  fact,  technological  change  increases  labour productivity and - given an adequate elasticity - proportionally the demand for labour and this can be enough to fully compensate initial job losses. Using data for the UK economy, the authors estimated an elasticity coefficient equal to 0.9 and this was sufficient - in the authors' opinion - to rule out innovation from the possible causes of British unemployment.

Finally  Nickell  and  Kong  (1989)  focused  their  attention  to  the  operating  of  the  compensation mechanism "via decrease in prices" in nine UK two-digit industries. Putting forward a price equation where cost-saving effects of labour-saving technologies were fully transferred into decreasing prices, the authors found out that in seven sectors out of nine a sufficiently high demand elasticity was able to imply an overall positive impact of technological change on employment.

Turning  the  attention  to  the  second  stream  of  literature,  according  to  the  different  nature  of  ICTs diffusion  (process vs product  innovation)  and  to  the  different  effectiveness  of  the  compensation mechanisms, growth can be more or less labour intensive.

Boltho and Glyn (1995) elaborated data on OECD countries over sub-periods within 1960-93. Their main results from pooling estimates show that the employment/growth relationship is not so robust from a  descriptive  point  of  view,  but  it  is  confirmed  by  simple  econometric  estimates  (univariate  and contemporaneous). Interestingly enough, the positive correlation between GDP growth and employment growth is also confirmed over the period 1990-1993 at odds with the notion of jobless growth as a result of ICTs diffusion in the OECD economies.

Pini (1996) and Piacentini and Pini (2000) obtained less optimistic results. They carried out estimates of the employment elasticities - both in aggregate and by economic sectors - for the G-6 + Sweden over the period 1960-97. In the '90s, negative elasticities (jobless growth) were found in Italy, Germany, UK and Sweden, while all countries but Japan showed a decrease in such elasticities in comparison with the '80s. Clear-cut findings emerged when the attention was turned to the sectoral analysis: while all the countries  showed  negative  elasticities  for  manufacturing,  they  also  exhibited  positive  elasticities  in services.

Padalino and Vivarelli (1997) put forward an empirical study on the G-7 economies over the period 1960-1994. Their main conclusions pointed out that: a) In the long run, a marked job creation in North America contrasts with moderate employment creation in Europe; b) while in manufacturing post-Fordism and the diffusion of ICTs technologies mean jobless growth and negative employment elasticities in all countries but Japan, no similar clear-cut evidence is detectable with regard to the

whole economic system; c) long run evolution has to be distinguished by short run correlation; while North America and Europe structurally differ in their job creation capacity in the long run, both of them keep on showing a strong and statistically significant short run correlation between growth and employment.

Of course, the relationship between growth and employment is only the final outcome of a complex interaction between technological change and employment which operates through many direct and indirect mechanisms, as described in the previous Sections 2 and 3. Vivarelli 1995 (chaps. 7, 8 and 9)  and  Simonetti,  Taylor  and  Vivarelli  (2000)  proposed  a  simultaneous  equations  macroeconomic model  able  to  jointly  take  into  account  the  direct  labour-saving  effect  of  process  innovation,  the different  compensation  mechanisms  with  their  own  hindrances  and  the  job-creating  impact  of product innovation. Running three stages least squares regressions using American, Italian, French and  Japanese  data  over  the  period  1965-1993,  the  authors  showed  that  the  more  effective compensation  mechanisms  were  that  "via  decrease  in  prices"  and  that  'via  increase  in  incomes' (especially in European countries till the mid-eighties). The other mechanisms revealed to be less significant and conditional on the institutional structures of the different countries; for instance the 'mechanism  via  decrease  in  wages'  turned  out  to  be  relevant  in  the  American  flexible  labour market. Finally, product innovation significantly revealed its labour intensive potentiality only in the technological leader country in the period, namely the US.

## 5. CONCLUSIONS

1) According to the "compensation theory", market forces should assure a complete compensation of the initial labour-saving impact of process innovations. In Section 3 a critique of this approach has been proposed, the general conclusion being that - although compensation is always working - the complete counter-balancing of dismissed workers cannot be assumed ex-ante.

2) Given this theoretical indefiniteness, the risk is that the debate on the employment consequences of  technological  change  degenerates  into  a  stalemate  or  into  an  ideological  quarrel.  One  possible way-out from this situation is to carry-out empirical works which try to assess whether or not the demand of labour is affected by innovation.

3) As far as the available empirical evidence is concerned, contrasting results can emerge according to the different levels of analysis. While most of microeconometric studies find out a positive correlation between ICTs and employment, some doubts can be raised about the generalizability of such micro studies.  Once  attention  is  turned  to  the  sectoral  level,  the  distinction  between  product  innovation  (in labour friendly growing sectors, such as new ICT related services) and process innovation (in laboursaving  restructuring  sectors,  mostly  in  manufacturing)  becomes  important.  At  the  aggregate  level, different  input-output  simulations  can  have  opposite  results  according  to  the  functioning  of  different 'within and between sectors' compensation mechanisms. Finally, contrasting empirical results - about the  occurrence  of  jobless  growth  in  different  periods  and  different  countries  -  are  the  outcome  of different  balances  between  product  and  process  innovation  and  different  degrees  of  effectiveness  of compensation mechanisms.

4)  On  the  whole,  economists  cannot  propose  a  clear-cut  diagnosis  about  the  employment  impact  of innovation,  either  theoretically  or  empirically.  A  pragmatic  approach  should  be  put  forward:  the relationship  between  technological  change  and  employment  is  a  complex  problem  which  cannot  be entirely  solved  by  partial  equilibrium  models  or  apodictical  hypotheses  or  unfounded  empirical generalizations. Indeed, it is necessary to start from an "open minded" theoretical approach and from reliable data and then try to patiently discover, represent and estimate all the various direct and indirect effects of technological change.

## REFERENCES

Addison J. and Teixeira, P. 2001. Technology, Employment and Wages, Labour, 15, 191-219 Antonucci, T. and Pianta, M. 2002. Employment Effects of Product and Process Innovation in Europe, International Review of Applied Economics, 16, 295-307

Appelbaum, E. and Schettkat, R. 1995. Emplyment and Productivity in Industrialized Economies, International Labour Review, 134, 605-23

Boltho,  A.  and  Glyn,  A.  1995.  Can  Macroeconomic  Policies  Raise  Employment?,  International Labour Review, 134, 451-70

Boyer, R. 1988A. Technical Change and the Theory of Régulation, in Dosi, G., Freeman, C., Nelson, R., Silverberg, G. and Soete, L. (eds), Technical Change and the Economic Theory, London, Pinter, 67-94 Boyer, R. 1988B. New Technologies and Employment in the 1980s: From Science and Technology to Macroeconomic  Modelling,  in  Kregel,  J.A.,  Matzner,  E.  and  Roncaglia,  A.  (eds),  Barriers  to  Full Employment, London, Macmillan, 233-68

Boyer, R. 1988C. Assessing the Impact of RD on Employment: Puzzle or Consensus?, paper presented at the International  Conference  on  New  Technology:  its  Impacts  on  Labour  Markets  and  the Employment System, Berlin, December 5-7

Boyer, R. 1990. The Capital Labor Relations in OECD Countries: from the Fordist "Golden Age" to Contrasted National Trajectories, working paper CEPREMAP n.9020, Paris

Brouwer, E., Kleinknecht, A. and Reijnen, J.O.N. 1993. Employment Growth and Innovation at the Firm Level: An Empirical Study, Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 3, 153-59

Davis,  D.R.  1998,  Technology,  Unemployment,  and  Relative  Wages  in  a  Global  Economy, European Economic Review, 42, 1613-33.

Dobbs, I.M., Hill, M.B. and Waterson, M. 1987. Industrial Structure and the Employment Consequences of Technical Change, Oxford Economic Papers, 39, 552-67

Dosi,  G.  1988.  Source,  Procedure  and  Microeconomic  Effects  of  Innovation,  Journal  of  Economic Literature, 26, 1120- 71

Edquist,  C.,  Hommen,  L.  and  McKelvey,  M.  2001.  Innovation  and  Employment:  Product  Versus Process Innovation, Cheltenham, Elgar.

Entorf, H. and Pohlmeier, W. 1990. Employment, Innovation and Export Activities J.P. Florens (ed.), Microeconometrics: Surveys and applications, London, Basil Blackwell

Evangelista, R. 2000. Innovation and Employment in Services, in Vivarelli, M. and Pianta, M. 2000 (eds). The Employment Impact of Innovation: Evidence and Policy, London, Routledge, 121-48 Evangelista, R. and Savona, M. 2002. The Impact of Innovation on Employment in Services: Evidence from Italy, International Review of Applied Economics, 16, 309-18

Freeman, C., Clark, J. and Soete, L. 1982. Unemployment and Technical Innovation, London Pinter Freeman, C. and Soete, L. (eds) 1987. Technical Change and Full Employment, Oxford, Basil Blackwell Freeman,  C.  and  Soete,  L.  1994.  Work  for  All  or  Mass  Unemployment?  Computerised  Technical Change into the Twenty-first Century, London-New York, Pinter

Greenan, N. and Guellec, D. 2000. Technological Innovation and Employment Reallocation, Labour, 14, 547-90

Hall,  P.H.  and  Heffernan,  S.A.  1985.  More  on  the  Employment  Effects  of  Innovation,  Journal  of Development Economics, 17, 151-62

Hicks, J.R. 1932. The Theory of Wages, London, Macmillan

Hicks, J.R. 1973. Capital and Time, Oxford, Oxford University Press

Hobsbawm,  E.J. 1968. Industry and Empire: An  Economic History of Britain since 1750, Harmondsworth Middlesex, Penguin Books

Hobsbawm, E.J. and Rudé, G. 1969. Captain Swing, London

Kalmbach, P. and Kurz, H.D. 1990. Micro-electronics and Employment: A Dynamic Input-output Study of the West-German Economy, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 1, 371-86 Katsoulacos, Y.S. 1986. The Employment Effect of Technical Change, Brighton, Wheatsheaf

Keynes, J.M. 1973. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, in The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, London, Macmillan, first edn 1936 Layard, R. and Nickell, S. 1985. The Causes of British Unemployment, National Institute Economic Review, 111, 62-85 Layard, R., Nickell, S. and Jackman, R. 1991. Unemployment: Macroeconomic Performance and the Labour Market, Oxford, Oxford University Press Leontief, W. and Duchin, F. 1986. The Future Impact of Automation on Workers, Oxford, Oxford University Press Malthus, T.R. 1964. Principles of Political Economy, New York, M. Kelley, first edn 1836 Marshall, A. 1961. Principles of Economics, Cambridge, Macmillan, first edn 1890 Marx, K. 1961. Capital, Moscow, Foreign Languages Publishing House, first edn 1867 Marx, K. 1969. Theories of Surplus Value, London, Lawrence &amp; Wishart, first edn. 1905-10 Meyer-Krahmer F. 1992, The Effects of New Technologies on Employment, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 2, 131-49 Mill, J.S. 1976. Principles of Political Economy, New York, M. Kelley, first edn 1848 Neary, J.P. 1981. On the Short-run Effects of Technological Progress, Oxford Economic Papers, 32, 224-33 Nickell, S. and Kong, P. 1989. Technical Progress and Jobs, Centre for Labour Economics, Discussion Paper n.366, London, London School of Economics Padalino.  S.  and  Vivarelli,  M.  1997.  The  Employment  Intensity  of  Economic  Growth  in  the  G-7 Countries, International Labour Review, 136, 191-213 Petit,  P.  1995.  Employment  and  Technological  Change,  in  Stoneman,  P.  (ed.),  Handbook  of  the

Pasinetti, L. 1981. Structural Change and Economic Growth, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Amsterdam, North Holland, 366-408

Pianta,  M.  2000.  The  Employment  Impact  of  Product  and  Process  Innovations,  in  Vivarelli,  M.  and Pianta,  M.  2000  (eds).  The  Employment  Impact  of  Innovation:  Evidence  and  Policy,  London, Routledge, 77-95 Pianta, M. 2004. Innovation and Employment, in Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D. and Nelson, R. (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, Oxford University Press, Oxford, chap. 21. Piacentini, P. and Pini, P. 2000. Growth and Employment, in Vivarelli, M. and Pianta, M. 2000 (eds). The Employment Impact of Innovation: Evidence and Policy, London, Routledge, 44-76 Pigou, A. 1933. The Theory of Unemployment, London, Macmillan Pigou, A. 1962. The Economics of Welfare, London, Macmillan, first edn 1920 Pini,  P.  1996,  An  Integrated  Cumulative  Growth  Model:  Empirical  Evidence  for  Nine  OECD countries, 1960-1990, Labour, 10, 93-150 Piva, M. - Vivarelli, M. 2003. Innovation and Employment: Evidence from Italian Microdata, IZA Discussion Paper n. 730, Bonn. Piva, M. - Vivarelli, M. 2004. Technological Change and Employment: Some Micro Evidence from Italy, Applied Economics Letters, 11, 373-76 Ricardo, D. 1951 Principles of Political Economy, in Sraffa, P. (ed.), The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, vol. 1, third edn 1821 Rosenberg, N. 1976. Perspectives on Technology, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press Say, J.B. 1964. A Treatise on Political Economy or the Production, Distribution and Consumption of Wealth, New York, M. Kelley, first edn 1803 Simonetti, R., Taylor, K. and Vivarelli, M. 2000. Modelling the Employment Impact of Innovation, in Vivarelli,  M.  and  Pianta,  M.  (eds),  The  Employment  Impact  of  Innovation:  Evidence  and  Policy, London, Routledge, 26-43 Sismondi, J.C.L. 1971. Nouveaux Principes d'Economie Politique ou de la Richesse dans ses Rapports

Sinclair, P.J.N. 1981. When will Technical Progress Destroy Jobs?, Oxford Economic Papers, 31, 1-18 avec la Population, Paris, Calmann- Levy, first edn 1819

Smolny,  W.  1998.  Innovations,  Prices  and  Employment:  A  Theoretical  Model  and  an  Empirical Application for West German Manufacturing Firms, Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 359-81 Steuart, J. 1966. An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy, Chicago, Oliver and Boyd, first edn 1767 Stoneman, P. 1983. The Economic Analysis of Technological Change, Oxford, Oxford University Press Sylos Labini, P. 1969. Oligopoly and Technical Progress, Cambridge (Mass.), Harvard University Press, first edn 1956 Van Reenen, J. 1997. Employment and Technological Innovation: Evidence from U.K. Manufacturing Firms, Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 255-84 Venables, A.J. 1985. The Economic Implications of a Discrete Technical Change, Oxford Economic Papers, 37, 230-48 Vivarelli, M. 1995. The Economics of Technology and Employment: Theory and Empirical Evidence, Aldershot, Elgar Vivarelli, M. and Pianta, M. 2000 (eds). The Employment Impact of Innovation: Evidence and Policy, London, Routledge Whitley,  J.D.  and  Wilson,  R.A.  1982.  Quantifying  the  Employment  Effects  of  Micro-electronics, Futures, 14, 486-95 Whitley,  J.D.  and  Wilson,  R.A.  1987.  Quantifying  the  Impact  of  Information  Technology  on Employment Using a Macroeconomic Model of the United Kingdom Economy, in OECD, ICCP paper

12: Information Technology and Economic Prospects, OECD, Paris

Wicksell, K. 1961. Lectures on Political Economy, London, Routledge &amp; Kegan, first edn 1901-1906