## A history of social psychological reactions  to new technology

## Jim  Carlopio

Industrial  Technology Institute,  PO Box 1485, Ann Arbor, MI 48106, USA

The historical  development of  new  technology  can  be usefully  viewed  as a threephase process with a number of intermediate forms. For example, technology may be seen as having progressed from dependent machines (e.g. bucket elevators), to semiautomatic machines  (e.g.  Jacquard  loom) and, finally, to automatic machines  (e.g. continuous process technologies).  Dependent machines were labour-saving technologies  from the  workers'  point of  view.  They were  generally  positively  regarded  as they eased  our physical  burden  and  allowed  our intellectual  advancement.  Semiautomated devices only required that we tend to their needs. These  machines were no longer assisting us. We were, and in many cases still are, assisting them. These labourenslaving devices require workers to perform semi-automatic  tasks demanding little more than reflexive attention. The third phase in this history of technology may be seen from the workers' point of view as the introduction of labour-replacing processes. This  technology totally replaces the human element in performing the actual work. It removes the worker from the production process, for example, into the processes of supervision,  planning and/or maintenance  of the equipment and systems. Unfortunately, this phase also has the potential to devalue workers, undermine their power and skills, and displace many workers from their  jobs.

From  this  historical  review  of  workers'  reactions  to technology,  workers  are found to react against two things: first, against exploitation or unsatisfactory working conditions (e.g. job fractionalization  or oversimplification) and, second, against job displacement.  Current academic concerns and innovative business practices (e.g. job redesign,  sociotechnical  systems theory,  participative  styles),  although  not  completely satisfactory, address the first of the two problems traditionally associated with new technology by attempting to modify workers'  and managers' jobs and environments to better suit their needs. The  second problem, job displacement, has been too long ignored by Europe and America. Although we seem to have progressed in the last 200 years  from Luddism  to unionism, we  are still within  the same ' mind set ' of management vs. the workers, the controlled fighting the controlling, that we were in 200 years ago. It is this ' cultural conversation ' that we are in, which keeps management from seeing the long-range  benefits in treating workers as their most valuable partners. Management needs to see that it is wiser to devise production systems that make use of the flexibility and intelligence of people than it is to  try and design all the ' life ' out of production.

The historical development of ' new technology ' can usefully be viewed as a threephase process with a number of intermediate forms. For example, Friedmann (1955) viewed technology as having progressed from ' dependent.  machines where feeding, control and regulation constantly depended on the hand of man ' to ' semi-automatic machines  which reduced the intervention of man, and finally,  born of the perfecting ' ' of the first two ' to automatic machines ' in which the worker is eliminated in the role

of  operator ' (pp. 177-178). Early  attempts  at  mechanization  such  as  transfer machines or bucket elevators are examples of  dependent machines. The Jacquard loom is an illustration of Friedmann's semi-automatic machine. Finally, continuous processing  technologies  (e.g.  power  plants,  oil  refineries and  chemical  processing plants) are the archetypical ' fully automatic ' machines in this conceptualization.

When a new phase begins,  examples of  new technologies  are introduced and spread. However, the use of equipment, machinery and methods from earlier stages does not disappear. For example, when the European Industrial Revolution ushered in semi-automatic machines people did not stop using or inventing new dependent machines.  Likewise,  when  we  moved  into  the  (automatic)  third  phase  we  were still exploiting the innovations associated with  the factory and the U S  Industrial Revolution  was  in  full  swing.  Thus,  these  phases  are  not  discrete  or mutually exclusive. They are, however,  illustrative of  the major changes and technological innovations which led to the state of affairs we find ourselves in today.

Drawing from Friedmann's classification scheme and viewing these stages from the point of view of  their impact on the worker leads to an interesting interpretive schema from which to examine the effects different types of technology have had on workers. At first, equipment and machines were used to assist people in doing their work.  These ' dependent  machines ' were labour-saving technologies  from  the workers' point of view. They were generally positively regarded as they eased our physical  burden  and  allowed  our  intellectual  advancement.  Technology  became increasingly advanced as our sciences explored the frontiers of  knowledge and we began to create technologically advanced machines which no longer merely aided us  in  our effort,  but  actually  did  the majority  of  the  work  for  us.  These ' semiautomated ' devices only required that we tend to their needs. They were no longer assisting us.  In fact  we  were,  and  in  many  cases still are,  assisting  them.  These machines went beyond the labour-saving devices of the first phase to a new phase of labour-enslaving devices. In this phase workers' jobs require them to perform semiautomatic tasks demanding little more than reflexive attention. Workers, however, cannot be completely free from the process nor usually derive any intellectual stimulation from it  (Friedmann, 1955).  The  third phase in this history of technology may be seen from the workers' point of view as the introduction of labour-replacing processes. This  technology totally replaces the human element in performing the actual work. It removes the worker from the production process, for example, into the processes of supervision,  planning  and/or  maintenance  of  the  equipment  and  systems.  This labour-replacing phase has the potential to elevate the worker to new levels within organizational  structures. Hazardous  or mindless jobs are better  performed  automatically and new heights of  production  efficiency and quality  can be realized  by organizations employing automation. Unfortunately, this phase also has the potential to devalue workers, undermine their power and skills, and displace many workers from their jobs. Social psychological reactions to these three phases will be discussed after an examination of pre-industrial reaction to mechanization.

## Automata-pre-industrial influences

Mumford  (1  934)  suggests  that  the  invention  of  automata  (mechanical  objects, creatures and beings) had an important non-technological  effect on people and on

society.  These inventions  influenced  17th-century philosophical  thought  because they  suggested ' mechanical  attributes  for  men  and  extended  the  analogies  of mechanization  to  more  subtle and  complex organic  facts ' (p. 41). For  example, Boring (1  950) mentions the influence of  mechanical  humans on  Descartes' application of  the principles  of  physics  to man and on his conception of  the body  as a machine. A body without a soul, whether it be an animal or a mechanical figure of a person, was an automaton according to Descartes (1662). A little less than a century later, La Mettrie (1748) took Descartes' notions further and claimed that humans are basically automata. Through this objective, materialistic and naturalistic description of  behaviour  he  paved  the  way  for  later  behaviouristic  psychology  (Wertheimer, 1970).  During  this  extremely  long  pre-automation period  (1  200-1  600)  people developed both the physical, mechanical technology, and a philosophical acceptance of it  which enabled them to adapt technological principles to work and later to develop specifically labour-saving technologies.

## Reactions to labour-saving  technology

In  the  mid-15th  century,  printing  using  type  cast  in  an  adjustable  mould  was employed and soon spread throughout Europe. Workers in 16th-century Italy used elaborate silk-throwing machinery, and complex manual looms were employed for weaving figured fabrics. The Italians also made the first use of  the screw press for striking coins and making medals.  In Holland, the windmill was used for powering saws and crushers, as well as for traditional grain milling. The  windmill, scoop-wheel and Archimedian screw were helpful in draining and reclaiming land. These laboursaving  devices,  and  many  more  like  them,  led  to  numerous  positive  changes  in people's lives; for example, iron replaced wood  knitted silk hose became available, , forks replaced fingers for eating, ale was transformed into beer, and the spinningwheel and the sewing machine revolutionized the textile industry (Hall, 1967). In general,  labours  were  reduced  and  the  impossible  became  possible  with  the introduction of labour-saving devices.

The examples above illustrate how labour-saving devices truly aided humans in their work. The eyes, ears, knowledge and skills of the artisan and craftsman were facilitated by these early automatic devices. Within this first phase the traditional trades, skills  and crafts were either left, for the most part, unchanged (e.g. the potter's wheel), or were truly enhanced by the introduction of the automatic mechanism (e.g. the  printing  press).  During the Middle Ages  and  the  period  of  the  Renaissance people's horizons were widened by technology. Their  standards of living rose. Wealth and the distribution  of goods increased.  Thus, the social psychological reaction to labour-saving technologies was generally positive.

## Reactions to labour-enslaving  technology

From the dawn of human kind,  through the Middle Ages, up to the creative and glorious period of the Renaissance there are countless examples of our technological growth and innovation. According to Hall (1967), the Middle Ages stand out in the

history of  technology with the associated power revolution  and agricultural innovations. During  the  Renaissance people merely built upon these gains and  added little beyond an expansion of  the size, scope and intricacy of machines and production capabilities. However, in terms of  the history of  technology, the Renaissance contained the seeds of creation. During this period the values, attitudes, and institutions of society had changed. Western Europe turned from its spiritual-medieval  thinking to more enlightened, secular and quantitative approaches which were more ' openminded ' and receptive to innovation and to development (Kranzberg,  1967). The Renaissance stressed material goals. People became more individualistic and versatile, seeking to gratify the senses and to enjoy life. Also at this time there was a general increase in the economic well-being of Europe, the New World was discovered, and all this eventually led to  the Industrial Revolution in the next century (Hall, 1967). It is the Industrial  Revolution which gave life to the seeds found in the Renaissance which eventually developed into today's technology. As automation shifted into its next phase, however, it no longer merely helped people to do their work. People at work were actually transformed from ' craftsperson ' using an automated procedure to ' machine operator ' for example, forever changing society, culture, people and their work.

Phases in the  history of any subject are rarely clearly delineated in such  a way that a precise statement regarding the causes of, or the beginning of, a certain event or period can be made with certainty. The  history of technology is no exception. There are, however, several points central to the history of technology which are intimately entwined with the Industrial Revolution and which point to the conclusion regarding its importance in this history of technology. The general increase in manufacturing and production, the increase in factory work, population concentration in cities and towns, and the intkraction of these and other technological developments with economic, social, cultural and political changes which together produced the ' revolutionary transformation in Western man's ways of working and living  which is called the ' Industrial Revolution, make it a major milestone in the history of automation (Hall, 1967, p. 107).

As a result of the Industrial Revolution, people's lives and work changed. Due to the invention of new machines, new energy sources, and new organization of work, more goods were produced with less human effort (Kranzberg, 1967). New and varied products  were  available over a wider  marketing area.  Innovations  in  agricultural technology allowed an adequate food supply necessary to support increased urbanization. As the population moved from farm to town, so did the sources of wealth move from land to industrial production involving a wider distribution  of wealth. However, the  move from farms to cities, from crafts  to  factories, from labour saving to labour  enslaving, did  not  only mean ' great  new  horizons ' for  society  or for  the worker. Mechanization, from the 17th century on, tended to standardize work processes and to make them capable of machine operation (Mumford, 1934). Workers operating semi-automatic machines became ' machine-herds '. According to Mumford, workers attended to their flocks  of machines and fed, oiled and fixed them. Work in textile mills, stamping factories or straight-line assemblage became ' servile in character, and no amount of apology or psychological rationalization can make it otherwise: nor can the social necessity  for the product mollify  the process  itself'

(p. 41  1). Although the philosophical implications of  Mumford's position were not likely to be  known  to  18th- and  19th-century workers, they did  react  against the exploitative  and  degrading  practices  of employers.  For  example,  great  social upheavals began to take place in Europe around the turn of the 19th century.

Amongst the notable labour disorders were the Lyons insurrections of 1831 and 1834. Wright (1960) suggests that these riots, of the silk weavers in Lyons, occurred either  because  of  bitter  resentment  on  the  part  of  the  workers  regarding  unfair labour practices of employers or middlemen, or they were spontaneous hunger riots. Dunham (1955) suggests similar catalysts. After the revolution of July 1830, Lyons was at its worst. Taxes were increased threefold for the working class but increased only minimally for the bourgeoisie in control of both the government and industry. At the same time, two ' unions ' of a sort were being formed by the weaver foremen and helpers. A committee of manufacturers and foremen met with government approval to draw up a wage-scale agreement. When approval of the agreement was withdrawn in  1831,  the  weavers,  resentful  of  both  the  government  and  the  manufacturers, revolted.

English textile workers, and British society in general, were following a course somewhat parallel to the French. Bad harvests and the resulting high prices of provisions, along with a failure of South American trade, changes in fashion due to war, and high wartime taxation, all contributed to great social distress in the early 1800s. On the labour front, there were disputes regarding wages and conditions of work. When negotiations  broke  down, and the American market collapsed,  great  social disruption occurred. The British did not react with ' surprising docility ' as Wright noted  the  French  did  when  faced  with  similar  circumstances.  English  workers responded  with  widespread  attacks  on  the  machinery  of  production.  The term ' Luddism ' was coined in  181  1 and has since been  accepted  as a generic label for machine breaking throughout English history (Thomis, 1970).

Machine breaking  was not new in the  1800s. It had  been  a part  of  recorded labour history since Restoration times (Thomis, 1970). Luddism seems to have as its primary  objective the exertion  of  pressure on  employers  by  employees  for  some specific purpose. It  may be seen as a form of ' collective bargaining by riot ' (Thomis, 1970). For example:

- 0 In 1710, a London hosier had his machine frames broken because he took on too many apprentices.
- 0 Coal miners in the 1740s won wage increases and in 1765  won the right to select new employers when their annual contracts expired.
- 0 In the 1760s, looms were broken both to attack wage-cutting employers and to get workmen who were not contributing to the strike to do so.
- 0 In 1779,  framework knitters in Nottingham broke the frames of their employers because of the failure to secure parliamentary regulation for the hosiery trade.

Clearly,  these  examples illustrate  that  attacks on machinery  were not  always meant as a show of resentment toward new technology or as resistance to innovation in general. The immediate cause of Luddism was not the invention of new machinery. Darvall(l969) suggests that it was the economic conditions aggravated by the stoppage of trade with America. Thomis  (1  970)  agrees and provides evidence in support of

this conclusion. He holds that the working class  was dissatisfied  with high food prices and low wages. Letters and petitions were received by the government, in November 1811, predicting  trouble  if  any further  increases in  grain  prices  or potatoes  were unaccompanied by equivalent increases in wages. By spring 181  2 just such a situation had developed.

The workers' grievances were many and varied but primarily concerned with management  and  labour  practices.  Workers  reacted  against  wage  reductions, employers' efforts  to  defraud  them  of  wages,  the  employment  of  unapprenticed workers, and the deliberate manufacture of inferior products. Although workers were interested in reducing the number of labour-replacing machines, they were primarily concerned with unfair labour practices adopted by employers, not with resistance to machinery  or to  innovation.  Workers  resented  and  resisted  being  exploited  and abused.

Noble (1984) agrees with this interpretation and says that modern trade union officials and  workers are threatened,  as were the Luddites, not  by  the machinery itself  but by ' managements' use of the machinery as a means of, and a camouflage  for, the attack on labor ' (p. 249). Management uses numerical control, for example, to centralize control, weaken unions, lower wages and intensify the work pace all in the name of  progress.  In the early 19th century, the use of jigs and fixtures in metal working was the heart of interchangeable parts manufacture. Eventually, this led to increased specialization. Toolmakers became distinguished from machinists. With the introduction of scientific management and its attempt ' to shift the locus of  skill from the production floor to the tool room ' , management was able to employ less skilled, cheaper machine operators (Noble, 1984, p. 80).

Mechanization  and  development  of  mechanical  standards within  the factory system, according to Mumford (1934), had three negative effects on workers.  First was the castration of skill. People were excluded from craft apprenticeship, work was specialized and subdivided to the point where skill was nullified. The  second was the discipline of starvation. Workers were without skill or education and were forced by starvation, ignorance and fear to work with machines in factories. The third was the removal of alternative occupations by means of land monopoly and ' dis '-education. People were generally lacking the necessary mobility or resources to overcome these trends.

In the last 5 0 years, the effects, which began with the factory system's resulting productivity increases, have ' snow-balled ' into industrial managements' and industrial engineers' efforts to design jobs as simply as possible. Scientific management's concern for saving  time and increasing output, as well as Ford's assembly line, are  two strong factors leading to our current state of job simplification, rationalization and fractionization (Drucker, 1967; Guest, 1967; Mann &amp; Hoffman, 1960). However, if it was the move toward tfie factory system spurred by scientific management and the assembly line that workers have reacted against, why is it that the first to react were Luddites  and the people in Lyons who were mainly textile workers with no true assembly  lines  and  sometimes no  factories per  se? Walker (1967) contends  that because textiles were traditionally  a handicraft industry, because workers had little control over the methods, sequence and pace of their jobs, and because all decisions not programmed  into the machines were made by management, the effects of  the

transfer of skill from humans to machines ' is nowhere more strikingly exemplified ' (p. 96).  Weavers  and  spinners were once apprenticed,  highly  skilled craftspeople enjoying  considerable  prestige.  With  the  introduction  of  automation  technology, textile workers' relative status was reduced (Darvall,  1969; Walker, 1967) as their skills  and  jobs  were  reduced  to  repetitive,  low  skilled,  machine-tending  tasks. Friedmann (1  955) succinctly summarizes this process: The closer we come to automation-without, however,  reaching  it-the more the  share of  labor  left  to  man seems, in itself, stripped of all intellectual or technological interest ' (p. 178).

There are philosophical  arguments against automation/mechanization as well. Mumford  (1934) points  out three.  He holds that  manufacture  cuts at the root of individual labour power transforming the worker into a cripple by forcing the development of highly specialized dexterity. Mumford also points out that Kant's doctrine stating  that humans should be treated as an end,  not as  a  means, was formulated  just as workers were beginning to be exploited, mined, exhausted and then discarded, as was the landscape. According to Mumford, industrialization also allows employers' responsibility for workers' lives and health to end with the payment for the day's work.  He  views  the  manufacturing  process  as  ' a  system  which  lent  itself  to adulteration  and to deteriorated  standards of  production  almost as much as it lent itself  to technical improvements ' (p. 146). He points to the textile industry as an example of the rapid and violent degradation which takes place. He  concludes that as industry became more advanced from a mechanical point of view it at first became more  backward  from a human  standpoint' (p.  146). Mumford  proposes  that  the ' factory system is perhaps the most remarkable piece of regimentation. .  . in the last thousand years ' (p. 174). In part, this seems to be due to the unfortunate alliance of mechanization with militarization which restricts actions and encourages the use of rough and ready tactics (Mumford,  1934). Modern theorists continue to hold this view. Noble (1984) regards the new computer-based  ideology of  total control ' as seductive and contagious. Spurred by ties to the military and the military-sponsored technical  community,  industry  managers  caught  the  enthusiasm  associated  with profitable  contracts,  prestige  and  patriotism.  Unfortunately,  this also propagates traditional beliefs regarding work simplification, efficiency and management control over production and labour ' as an end in itself, in order to safeguard and to extend management's rights  (p. 57). '

## Reactions to labour-replacing  technology

Another reason for workers to resist industrial innovation and machine invention was that they feared losing their jobs as a result. For example:

- In the early 1600s in London, workers complained against ' engines for workinge ' which allowed one man to do more work than seven had previously.  In 1638  the use of these machines was banned.
- Three days of riots against machines, which allegedly could do the work of  20 men, occurred in Spitalfield in 1675.

- Finishers in Lancashire in 1737 reacted against machinery which cut the cost of cloth dressing to one-third of the normal, thus causing great loss of work.
- Weavers in January 1768 attacked machines which could do  six times the normal amount of work.

An example from France is the problem created by the invention of  the Jacquard loom. Developed by 1804, Joseph-Marie Jacquard's loom eliminated the need for a whole army of helpers who had pulled the cords operating the many lifts necessary in weaving a pattern. This fact was appreciated almost immediately in Lyons where it ' threatened such widespread unemployment that serious riots of  the silk workers broke out and Jacquard's life was in danger ' (Dunham, 1955, p. 253). The loom was introduced successfully in numerous other locations over the next 50 years where its contribution to the ' art ' generated such contagious enthusiasm that ' few seemed to realize that  the endless changes involved were important  causes of  sudden and disastrous overproduction, crises,  and  unemployment ' (Dunham, 1955, p. 256). More modern examples are: telephone operators being reduced by 80 per cent with the introduction of an automated switching mechanism; in American textile plants one worker now supervises 1200  spindles; automated cargo vessels requiring 32 crew, down from 56; and pulley-block machinery allowing 10 workers to replace 110.

Fears  regarding  the  labour-replacing  consequences  of  machinery  and  automation have been with us so long that they are part of our language and history. For example, the word ' sabotage ' originated in the 1800s when French workers threw their  wooden  shoes,  or sabots, into  machines  to  halt  production  (World  Book Encyclopedia, 1985). The most modern meaning of the word is more related to the wartime practice of  damaging production and communication in enemy countries. In  an  early  industrial  psychology  text,  Alport (1  932) wrote  that  the ' prevalent unemployment ' of the day was ' due in no small part ' to workers being replaced by ' machinery and new scientific processes of manufacturing ' (p. 247).

Thus, we have  reached  our latest  phase  of  technological  development:  technology leading to the replacement of the human in the production or work process. Continuous process technologies, such as  those used in the early 20th-century electric power plant, are good examples. One person operating a crane moves coal from the train  or barge  to a mechanical  feeder.  From  this  point  on, automatic technology takes over the entire process.  Workers are employed as observers, regulators  and supervisors, not as producers (Mumford, 1934).

## Conclusion

Mumford  (1 934) believes that  we  historically  resisted  mechanical  improvements themselves by  smashing the machines  or by  murdering  their  inventor.  We resist mechanical organization because in a ' world of ideas [where] romanticism and utilitarianism go side by side ' (p. 284) mechanization directly makes us materialistic and rational, and indirectly makes us hyper-emotional and irrational. This  was a popular notion  in  the  early  to  mid-1900s.  Fritz  Lange's  famous  silent  movie Metropolis, released  in 1926, illustrates  the  popular  ideas  that  mechanization  dehumanizes

people,  and  that  concern  for  our fellow humans  and  love will  triumph  over  the enslaving march of progress which drives a wedge between  the controlled and the controlling classes of society.

Today, as throughout history, workers generally do not resist technological innovation. Technological  innovation usually  promises better  quality of  work  life and better quality of life in general for many workers. However, workers justifiably react bitterly  against  exploitation,  degradation  and  unhealthy  or  unsafe  working  conditions.  They  fight  management  and  unfair  labour  practices  any  way  they  can. Sometimes they break machines. Sometimes they withhold their labour.

Noble (1984) points out that the idea that labour is against technological change has become a staple of popular, management and academic wisdom about progress. He cites John Diebold, Edward Shils (Wharton School management consultant) and Niel  Chamberlain (Yale University) to illustrate this belief. However, as far as the modern worker is concerned, this notion is fundamentally mistaken (Noble, 1984). Noble cites several recent studies  (e.g. at University of Michigan and MIT)  providing evidence that workers are non-resistant and often accommodating of the technologically driven changes they often perceive as necessary and inevitable.  From 1948 to 1979, the United Auto Workers' Union (UAW) national agreement with US auto companies  included  a  clause  which  stated  that  organized  labour  recognized  the principle  that  a  continuing  improvement  in  the  standard  of  living  of  employees depends upon technological  progress, better  tools, methods, processes and equipment, and a cooperative attitude on the part of all involved parties. It further recognized the principle that to produce more with the same amount of human effort is a sound economic and social objective. According to an article in the more recent UAW Research Department's Bulletin (1985), ' The UAW has always welcomed new technology and the higher productivity it brings-provided workers share fairly in  its fruits,  and  are protected  against its adverse effects ' (p.  1). Similarly, Turniansky (1986) studied 25 instances of the implementation  of  new technology, in union and non-union manufacturing, and found evidence of ' very little ' personal resistance to technological change.

British studies, carried out in the early 1980s, also provided evidence that ' work force and union opposition has not been among the major obstacles to introducing new technology ' (Northcott, Fogarty &amp; Trevor, 1985). Davies (1986) reviewed the (European) literature concerned with worker resistance to technological change and found very little evidence of worker resistance being a major obstruction to technological progress. In fact, there is a growing belief among some  experts that middle and lower level managers have as many, or more, reasons to resist new technology, as they see their power bases being eroded and their  jobs disappearing, as do  workers. Davies (1 986) provides several examples of how managerial resistance to new technology is prevalent and has been a more significant factor than worker resistance.

From our historical review of workers' reactions to technology we find workers reacting against two things: first, against exploitation or unsatisfactory working conditions  (e.g. job  fractionalization  or oversimplification) and,  second,  against job displacement. Current academic concerns with quality of work life as illustrated by sociotechnical systems theory,  job redesign, and pay and organizational development concerns, among others, have been  reflected in the business world by increases in

autonomous work groups, quality circles, Scanolyn plans, and participative management and decision-making  practices.  These practices address the first of  the two problems  traditionally  associated  with  new  technology  by  attempting  to  modify workers'  and managers' jobs  and environments to better  suit their  needs.  These practices, however, have not had the effect academicians theorized they would. Many workers and their unions, for example, view participation and the QWL  movement as another management scheme to de-power and to exploit workers (Parker, 19 8 5 ) .

The  second problem,  job displacement, has been too long ignored by Europe and America. Unfortunately, the problem of worker displacement will only get worse in the future if left unchecked. As the largest segment of our population gets older, and more workers are displaced by automation, we will not only find a decrease in per capita national productivity but that society will be faced with a staggering number of unemployed retirees forced to live on fixed incomes derived from savings, investments, pensions, and social security (if it still exists). What will happen to those who want to work?  Will they be retrained by the organization and eased into new positions of supervision and respect? Will the workers too numerous for the few newly created supervisory positions to be retrained by the organization, be retrained by society and integrated into the workforce?  Is it society's  or the organizations' responsibility to do this retraining and integrating?

Although we seem to have progressed  in the last 200 years from Luddism to unionism, we are still within the same  mind set  of management vs. the workers, the ' ' controlled  fighting the controlling, that we were in  200 years ago (e.g. Levitan &amp; Johnson, 19 8 3 ) . It is this ' cultural conversation ' that we are, which keeps management from seeing the long-range benefits to treating workers as their most valuable partners. Management needs to see that it is wiser to devise production systems that make use of the flexibility and intelligence of people than it is to try and design all the ' life ' out of production.

## Acknowledgement

The author thanks  David  Roitman for his helpful  comments  and advice on an  earlier draft of  this article.

## References

Alport, F. H. (1932). Psychology in relation to social and political problems. In Paul S. Achilles (Ed.), Psychology at Work. New York: Whittlesy House.

- Boring, E. G. (1950). A History of Experimental Psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Darvall, F. 0.  (1969). Popular Disturbances  and Public Order in Regency  England. New York: Augustus M. Kelly.

Davies, A. (1986). Industrial Relations and New Technology. London: Croom Helm.

Descartes,  R. (1662). On mechanism in human action.  In M. Wertheimer (1970), A Brief History o f Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston.

Drucker, P. F.  (1967). Technological trends in the twentieth century. In M. Kranzberg &amp; C.  W. Purse11  Jr (Eds), Technology  in Western Ciwilization. New York: Oxford University Press.

Dunham, A. L. (1955). TheZndustrial  Revolution i n France. New York: Exposition Press.

## Social psychological reactions to new technology

Friedmann, G. (1 9 5 5 ) . Industrial Society. Chicago, IL: Free Press.

Guest, R. H. (1 9 6 7 ) . The rationalization  of  management.  In M. Kranzberg &amp; C. W. Pursell Jr (Eds), Technology in Western Ciwilization. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hall,  A.  R. (196 7 ) . Early  modern  technology,  to 1600. In M.  Kranzberg &amp; C.  W.  Pursell Jr (Eds), Technology in Western Ciwilization. New York: Oxford University Press.

Kranzberg, M. (1 9 6 7 ) . Prerequisites for industrialization. In M. Kranzberg &amp; C. W. Pursell Jr (Eds), Technology in Western Civilization. New York: Oxford University Press.

La Mettrie, J. de (174 8 ) . L'homme machine. In M. Wertheimer (1970), A Brief History of Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston.

Levitan, S. A. &amp;Johnson, C. M. (1 9 8 3 ) . Labor and management: The illusion of cooperation. Harward Business Rewiew, 6( 5 ) ,   - 1 6 . 8

Mann, F. C. &amp; Hoffman, L. R. (1 9 6 0 ) . Automation and the Worker. New York: Henry Holt.

Mumford, L. (1 9 3 4 ) . Technics and Ciwilization. New York: Harcourt.

Noble, D. F. (198 4 ) . Forces of  Production. New York: Knopf.

Northcott, J., Fogarty, M. &amp;Trevor, M. (1 9 8 5 ) . Chips andyobs: Acceptance of N e w Technology at Work. London: Policy Studies Institute.

Parker, M. (1985). Inside the Circle:  A Union Guide to Q W L . Boston, MA: South End.

- Thomis, M. I. (1 9 7 0 ) . The Luddites. Hamden, CT: Archon.
- Turniansky, R. R. (1 9 8 6 ) . The implementation of production technology: A study of technology agreements. Ann Arbor, MI; Industrial  Technology Institute.

UAW Research Department (198 5 ) . Technology and  jobs: Problems and alternatives. Bulletin, October, November-December.

Walker, C. R. (1967). The social effects of mass production. In M. Kranzberg &amp; C. W. Pursell Jr (Eds), Technology in Western Ciwilization. New York: Oxford University Press.

Wertheimer, M. (197 0 ) . A Brief History of Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp;Winston.

- World Book Encyclopedia (198 5 ) . Sabotogue, vol. 1 7 . Chicago, IL: World Book.
- Wright, G. (1960). France in Modern Times. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.