## AN INCONVENIENT EXPERTISE

## French Colonial Sailors and Technological Knowledge in the Union Française

Minayo Nasiali

ABSTRACT: In the 1950s, French shipping companies began to replace their old fleet of steamships with new diesel ships. They also began to lay off sailors from French Africa, claiming that the changing technology rendered their labor obsolete. The industry asserted that African sailors did not have the aptitude to do other, more skilled jobs aboard diesel vessels. But unemployed colonial sailors argued differently, claiming that they were both able and skilled. This article explores how unemployed sailors from French Africa cast themselves as experts, capable of producing technological knowledge about shipping. In so doing, they shaped racialized and gendered notions about labor and skill within the French empire. The arguments they made were inconvenient, I argue, because colonial sailors called into question hegemonic ideas about who could be modern and who had the right to participate in discourse about expertise.

KEYWORDS: empire, expertise, French colonial sailors, masculinity, race, shipping

On 20 October 1951, a Senegalese sailor named Mamadou Koita finished a  tour  aboard  a  steamship. 1 He had worked for nearly two decades in ships' engine rooms as either a coal trimmer ( un soutier ) or fire stoker ( un chauffeur ) for one of France's largest cargo companies. But when he disembarked in Marseille, he found himself stranded for over two years. No shipping  company  would  hire  him.  Following  World  War  II,  major changes in international shipping saw new technologies transform entire fleets. 2 In  particular,  coal-powered  steamships  were  almost  entirely replaced  with  diesel-powered  vessels.  These  new  ships,  the  industry asserted, were more efficient, more streamlined, and, above all, more mod-

<!-- image -->

© The Institute of French Studies at New York University and the

Minda de Gunzburg Center for European Studies at Harvard University

doi:10.3167/fpcs.2019.370107

ern. Shipping companies also believed that revamping the industry necessitated  dramatic changes to the labor force. Companies, including the Messageries maritimes, stopped hiring sailors like Mamadou Koita, declaring that the new ships did not require such large crews, especially chauffeurs and soutiers , whose jobs had been rendered obsolete by the shift from coal to diesel. In order to maintain France's international position, the industry held, it needed to modernize, to cut the fat, to heed market forces-and to lay-off workers. African sailors, in the eyes of the industry, were as outdated as the engine rooms they had toiled in. This post-World War II consensus marked an important shift from earlier understandings about the utility of African sailors and their labor. Since the late nineteenth century, shipping companies had mostly hired seafarers from French colonies in West, Equatorial, and East Africa (the AOF, AEF, and Côte française des Somalis) to man engine rooms. The Messageries maritimes, Compagnie générale transatlantique and other companies often used racialized tropes to explain that sub-Saharan Africans' physique and 'natural' capacity to endure tremendous heat made them perfectly suited to toiling in what was widely seen as the worst place to work aboard ship. Following World War II, however, many in the industry claimed that African sailors did not have the aptitude for more skilled labor and therefore their place in the changing maritime economy was tenuous at best.

But in the 1950s, African sailors facing unemployment argued differently, claiming that they were both able and skilled. They asserted that their experience and knowledge cultivated while working on steamships made them perfectly capable of working aboard diesel vessels. In letters to state maritime officials, metropolitan union representatives, and shipping industry executives, sailors from France's African empire inserted themselves into debates about modernization. They argued that they had the necessary expertise to be part of the shipping industry and, by extension, the globalizing postwar economy. By contrast, industry leaders and many government officials understood maritime expertise in terms of a precise system of certification and training as well as membership in key networks of professional societies. 3 Largely excluded from these professional pathways, colonial sailors instead drew on France's mission civilisatrice , arguing that because of the ostensible success of the civilizing mission, they were bien élevés , or well-raised, and therefore capable agents of the imperial nation-state. 4

The shipping industry and maritime state authorities believed that technological progress was both natural and inevitable. Following this logic,  the  changes  that  technological  advances made in industries-for example, by rendering human labor redundant-were unavoidable. But as scholars of technology and labor have shown, 'technology does not have

an inherent dynamic of its own.… It is a result of social processes.' 5 Historians have sought to unpack the relationship of technology to power in an effort to expose the teleological tendencies central to twentieth-century endorsements of market capitalism. 6 In 1950s Marseille, unemployed sailors  from  French Africa similarly rejected deterministic arguments about technological change and the inevitability of modernization. In so doing, they cast themselves as actors who were capable of producing knowledge about shipping.

Sailors from French West and East Africa also contributed to racialized and gendered discourses about labor and skill. Scholarship on technology and postcolonial science in Africa has discussed how racial stereotyping has shaped understandings of expertise and helped generate gendered perceptions about 'technological knowledge and practices.' 7 Facing unemployment in metropolitan France, African sailors articulated alternative notions of masculinity and technical know-how. They contrasted dominant industry assumptions that linked expertise and manliness to whiteness with a different vision that played on the paradoxes and promises of the civilizing mission. To make their case, African merchant marines also drew on and helped perpetuate assumptions about racial difference.

Significantly, African sailors' assertions reflected, and perhaps anticipated, a broader postwar shift as imperial powers and colonial elites began to negotiate the so-called ends of empire. In this evolving moment, the civilizing mission itself increasingly seemed obsolete as a new-but relatedlogic of development gathered cache. Development theory had its roots in the interwar period but rose to prominence after World War II. 8 Ideas about how best to modernize the so-called Third World were embraced by the leaders of former colonies and empires alike and were grounded less in understandings about French civilization than in a supposedly universal measure of progress known as 'expert-ness.' French colonial sailors' claims formed an important counterpoint to a growing hegemonic perspective about who could be an expert in the postcolonial order. Their arguments were thus inconvenient, both for the French shipping industry and for state authorities, because they called into question dominant ideas about who had the right to shape discourse about expertise.

In the early 1950s, unemployed sailors from the AOF, AEF, and Côte française des Somalis sent a flurry of letters to maritime and city officials in Marseille describing the hard times they were facing in the port city. 'I have the honor to … draw your attention,' Hyacinthe Gomis wrote to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect in 1954, 'to the misery and the difficult situation in which a large number of AOF and AEF men find themselves.' 9 In another letter, the Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF, an association representing French colonial seamen, described 'more than 400 sailors …

[who] find themselves without work in Marseille and [who] are living in misery.… [A] large number of us do not receive unemployment benefits; some don't eat regular meals.' 10 Two unemployed sailors, Ousmane Sakho and Amadou Sy, explained to the prefect in a 1954 letter that 'the ship owners do not hire us.' 11 And although companies such as the Messageries maritimes 'are launching new ships,' a letter from the Amicale des originaires de la côte française des Somalis outlined, 'the crews of these vessels are formed without any of our compatriots.' 12 Finally, in a letter 'representing the citizen sailors of overseas France,' Akona N'Diaye described 'Senegalese sailors, who find themselves on the street … without housing, without clothes, totally vulnerable….' 13

Local officials were also concerned about the growing number of unemployed sailors stuck in Marseille and called these men a worrisome 'black proletariat.' 14 According to a report submitted to the Bouches-duRhône prefect, 'the problem of blacks in Marseille is essentially the problem of [unemployed] merchant marines.' 15 State  authorities  concluded that the greatest single factor resulting in high levels of unemployment was the modernization of the French fleet of cargo ships, specifically the transition from steam- to diesel-powered vessels. 16

Ships with diesel, compression-ignition engines appeared in limited numbers within international shipping before World War I, and their numbers increased slowly throughout the interwar period. 17 It  was  not until the 1950s, however, that they began to make significant inroads in the industry. 18 In the three decades following World War II, bolstered by the  dramatic  rise  in  petroleum  shipping,  companies  almost  entirely replaced their old fleets with newer, faster diesel ships. 19 According to the industry, diesel ships could operate with smaller crews and with men specially trained to handle the complicated technology in the engine room and bridge. Shipping, according to ship owners, was becoming more scientific, more mechanized, and more advanced, and the French merchant marines played an important role in boosting the nation's competitive edge in the global economy. 20 Despite such claims about this revolutionary technology, the rising postwar primacy of diesel ships was not the first time the industry had changed dramatically. Another major shift, the transition from sail to steam, had happened over the course of the nineteenth century. By the 1890s, marine propulsion was dominated by the coal-powered reciprocating steam engine. In the early twentieth century, the steam turbine began to grow in popularity. Initially, ships with steam turbines also ran on coal, but diesel-fueled boilers replaced them as the century progressed. By the 1960s, the reciprocating steam engine was seen as outdated, and the steam turbine remained popular only within small 'specialized niches.' 21

In France, the post-1945 makeover of the fleet was tied to the nation's larger modernization effort. After the war, the Jean Monnet-led Commissariat général du plan outlined a broad program for the reconstruction and revitalization of French industry. The overarching goal was to rebuild France's war-damaged infrastructure and to restore France to its prewar status as a global power. Rebuilding the merchant marines was a significant part of the larger Plan. But even before the Second World War, France had struggled to compete in the international shipping industry. As Michael Miller explains, both France's merchant navy and its ports had historically lagged behind other European countries and 'in the twentieth century Europe's greatest ports [included] Hamburg … Antwerp, London and Liverpool [while] … Le Havre and Marseille form[ed] a second, outer circle.' 22 World War II contributed further to France's relative poor standing as the Marine marchande lost about 70 percent of its fleet and German and allied bombings severely damaged or destroyed the country's main ports. But by 1953, Marseille and Le Havre had been 'rebuilt and outfitted with state-ofthe-art installations' and although the industry still lagged by comparative  international  standards,  the  fleet  grew  by  3,373  vessels. 23 Of these new ships, many were fuel tankers and most were equipped with diesel engines. About 1,900 steamships were retired during this period. 24

The rejuvenation of the fleet was not only perceived to be good for France, it was also seen to be good for its empire. Following the Second World War, the Fourth Republic government hoped that the creation of the Union française would strengthen colonial ties. The reestablishment of imperial cargo routes was part of this intent to bolster the economic relationships between metropole and colony. Such efforts should also be understood in terms of the merchant marines' deeply imperial origins. Many prominent twentieth-century French shipping companies got their start with nineteenth-century colonial conquests and depended on both colonial markets and African maritime labor to realize their interests. 25 Maintaining the colonies remained a major goal immediately following World War II, yet the place of colonial labor-specifically maritime workwithin the empire reveals conflicting understandings about modernization and the imperial nation-state.

A pervasive assumption within the French shipping industry was that African sailors were largely unskilled, which undercut their place in the modernizing merchant marines. 26 But what constitutes skilled work? Historians of gender, labor, and technology have demonstrated the importance of understanding work as a constructed set of norms, practices, and power relations. As Laura Frader explains, 'ideas about masculinity and femininity shaped class, wages … and notions of who could be considered legitimately a worker.' 27 In the case of the French merchant marines, dis-

nctions made between skilled and unskilled labor raise important questions about how notions of masculinity and racial difference colored perceptions  about  which  laboring  men  could  be  skilled.  Characterizing certain kinds of work as unskilled was important for keeping wages low and benefits nonexistent and, in general, distinguishing between colonial and metropolitan working men by fortifying strict and racialized hierarchies aboard ship and within the industry as a whole.

As Gopalan Balachandran explains, 'skills needed in the engine room were often learnt on the job' and it was a dirty, dangerous occupation. 28 The nineteenth-century mechanization of ocean vessels meant that the 'engine rooms of steam vessels more closely resembled industrial boiler rooms than anything on sailing vessels.' 29 Temperatures routinely rose above 140 degrees Fahrenheit and 'burns, scalding, and heat asphyxiation' were common. 30 Soutiers had to manage large quantities of coal, often moving it great distances below decks in rough waters. 31 Chauffeurs shoveled coal into the furnaces and were responsible for 'judg[ing] the state of the fire from its colour and keep[ing] up the boiler pressure.' 32 They also kept a close eye on the area beneath the flames, constantly on the lookout for 'clinkers' or dense chunks of coal and non-combustible minerals that prevented proper air circulation and negatively affected steam output. 33 Chauffeurs also had to know how to work with different types of coal, as the quality of fuel could change markedly from one port to another. 34

Engine crews on ocean-going steamships numbered in the dozens and could even reach 150 on the largest passenger liners. They were dubbed the black gang because the coal dust coated these men in a thick, black, oily crust. This name likely also had racial overtones as men of color most often performed this work. On steamships they were overseen by a handful of officers, including the chief engineer. By comparison, the engine crews of diesel ships were much smaller. Gone were the large boilers, the furnaces, the huge coal storage bins, and the carts used to ferry coal and spent ash around the bowels of the ship. In their place was a large, sleek, diesel  compression-ignition engine. A few fuel tanks were all that was needed to power this marine propulsion system. The black gang on diesel ships-the name persisted into the twentieth century-consisted of several licensed officers, including a chief engineer and first and second assistant engineers. Unlicensed crew members included a mechanic, several oilers who were in charge of lubricating 'the bearings of the main engine and auxiliaries,' and wipers who 'perform[ed] manual labor … such as cleaning and painting….' 35 In short, the number of jobs that were considered to be unskilled were reduced from several dozen on steamships to a mere handful on diesel vessels.

According to the French shipping industry, it was this seemingly natural market response to changes in technology that undermined colonial sailors' place in the modernizing fleet. As the Union maritime de Marseille wrote in a letter to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect: 'A specialized crew, is … absolutely necessary aboard many of the new vessels.' 36 Another set of letters drew a causal connection between levels of skill and racial difference by describing why African sailors had historically been hired. A representative from Marseille's merchant marine syndicate, which worked closely  with  the  shipping  companies, wrote that 'black sailors were … chosen to work aboard steamships running on coal, first for physiological reasons (better resistance to heat), and also because it is manual labor.' 37 In other words, there had been a time when African sailors were hired because their supposed racial characteristics filled a much-needed niche in the labor market. 'But,' this industry representative argued, 'because black sailors are very often less able to do any other work, and are being left behind by technological advances, they find themselves eliminated [from the labor force].' 38 More specifically, he continued, 'the shipping companies do not often hire crews of color … because of the following considerations: the progressive abandonment of the steam engine and, more generally, technological progress in the matter of naval construction, has often made apparent that the black sailor is less apt than the French metropolitan sailor at assuring the running and the correct utilization of modern ships.' 39 According to this letter, colonial sailors did not have the aptitude to do more difficult work precisely because of their race.  Shipping companies believed African sailors-as an essentialized group-were not capable of working aboard new vessels.

The letter also reveals how expectations about skill were shaped by understandings of masculinity. According to Marseillais ship owners, intellectual ability was a prerequisite for cultivating expertise as well as a marker of manliness. As historians of gender have shown, and as Sonya Rose explains, 'skill and the ability to run large, complex machinery were widely believed to be 'natural' masculine traits.' 40 Because colonial sailors were understood to be manual laborers, their place as men within the industry was called into question. Moreover, skilled work was not simply understood to be men's work; it was seen as white men's work. 41 Skill was something only certain kinds of men could have, namely, it was something colonial sailors were not supposed to have.

Letters from unemployed African sailors explicitly rejected the industry claims that they lacked skill and that their perceived lack of aptitude was biologically linked to their race. In a 1954 letter to the Bouches-duRhône prefect, Hyacinthe Gomis, representing the Associations des originaires de l'AOF et de l'AEF, wrote: 'members of our association … are

forbidden from working because of our seeming lack of competence in modern techniques and boat technology.' 42 Gomis challenged this line of reasoning, asserting that 'this argument is specious and without foundation.' 43 In another letter, a representative from the Union des marins de l'Afrique Noire called it 'a ridiculous pretext!' 44

Gomis further asserted that the French shipping companies' excuse that African sailors' lack of technological knowledge precluded them from being hired was 'easily challenged.' As proof of their ability, Gomis cited a recent census of 'specialized sailors who have proven their aptitude for various kinds of work aboard a modern ship.' He noted that these same sailors had also, in the past, received 'very good references provided by the navigation companies that they served.…' 45 Another letter, this time from representatives of two associations, the Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and the Amicale des originaires de la côte française des Somalis, was similarly incredulous that experienced sailors from colonial Africa, 'having worked without interruption in the same profession for more than five years, should be considered not qualified.' 46

The underlying reason for the exclusion of colonial sailors from the modernizing fleet, wrote representatives from the Union des marins de l'Afrique noire, was a simple one. African sailors were not being laid off because they lacked the know-how to sail modern ships. 'ONLY THE TRUTH MATTERS,' the organization wrote in all caps, they were being excluded 'BECAUSE THEY ARE BLACK.' 47 The organization demanded the 'cessation of this petty form of racial discrimination.' 48

Shipping companies and various associations representing their interests, however, vehemently denied that they were racially discriminating against African sailors from French colonies. As one letter from the Syndicat marseillais de la Marine marchande to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect attested, the 'Marseille shipping companies are not systematically overlooking native labor from the AOF, the AEF, or the Côte française des Somalis.' 49 In fact, the letter asserted, 'no discrimination could be suspected of them.' 50 Shipping companies insisted that the reason these former employees were not being hired was not because of their race, but for reasons of technology. Although African sailors had dismissed this argument as a mere pretext, shipping companies nonetheless doubled down on it. According to a letter from the Union maritime de Marseille to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect: 'Our sentiment is that the causes of the situation … do not seem to indicate a discrimination based on the origin of this category of laborer ... but rather on technological necessities stemming from the reality that coal powered steam ships are less and less numerous.' 51 The letter illuminates how technological changes were understood to be natural and thus inevitable. Yet scholars, notably Ruth

Oldenziel, have emphasized how these very notions about technological advances are themselves constructed and that such teleological understandings of progress are shaped by perceptions of gender and race. 52

Although shipping companies took pains to argue that race was not a factor in their decision to lay off colonial sailors, letters from industry representatives document the historical racialization of labor aboard ships. In a letter about the modernization of the Paquet fleet, a company representative tried to show that they had previously hired non-whites but inadvertently described the strict racial quota system that had been applied aboard coal powered steamships: 'During the time when the [Paquet] company possessed numerous steamships, it routinely employed [colonial subjects] in the engine room.' 53 On cargo ships from Senegal 'two quarters' of the men who worked in the engine room were Senegalese and 'one quarter were Arab.' 54 On cargo ships from Morocco, the quota was inverted: 'two quarters' of men working in the engine room were 'Arab and one quarter were Senegalese.' 55 Although this document detailed how shipping companies used race as qualifying marker for employment in the past, these same companies vehemently denied that their motivations for not hiring African sailors in the 1950s had anything to do with race.

Shipping companies were not, of course, inventing this discourse about race, aptitude, and difference; they were contributing to and building upon long-held assumptions rooted in the republican project. As Alice Conklin  and  many  others  have  shown,  France's  civilizing  mission deployed the language of rights and equality in order to rationalize exclusion. 56 It served to 'other' colonial subjects by cultivating hierarchies of difference. Beginning in the late nineteenth century, new developments in the so-called science of race bolstered the imperial project by drawing specious links between phenotype and understandings of biological inferiority. 57 Shipping companies' mid-twentieth-century claim that African sailors could only work in engine rooms because they were better suited to the heat, and too stupid to do anything else, is part of this long legacy of constructing difference.

What kinds of work, then, counted as skilled in the eyes of the shipping industry? And, importantly, what kinds of workers could be experts? Debates about modernization and the problem of unemployed colonial sailors reveal two ways in which technological knowledge was imagined and defined. The first vision, upheld by the industry and by many state officials, espoused a notion of expertise rooted in merchant marine certification, officer training and, above all, an elite maritime culture cultivated by company executives. The other, more subversive, vision was articulated by colonial sailors themselves. It harnessed the French civilizing mission and the notion that colonial subjects could become bien

élevés -or well-raised. African sailors argued that they had been trained from birth in the mission civilisatrice and therefore were skilled agents able to help France, and the merchant marines, modernize. In doing so, they helped to shape another logic integral to both the imperial and modernizing projects: the construction of hierarchical categories of race.

Special schools, in concert with government agencies, shaped dominant perceptions about skill in the merchant navy. According to the Inspection générale des affaires maritimes, 'in order to accede into a maritime occupation, it is necessary to acquire specific qualifications such as training in a teaching establishment or training at sea.' 58 Institutions known as Les écoles nationales de la Marine marchande (ENMM) issued diplomas to future officers, while Les écoles d'apprentissage maritime (EAM) certified would-be sailors. 59 In 1950, the ENMM issued several types of degrees, including Officer in Training, Long Haul Lieutenant, Long Haul Captain, and Lieutenant Mechanic. 60 As Bernard Cassagnou explains, 'these different diplomas correspond[ed] to different training pathways.' To become a long haul lieutenant, for example, 'the candidate completes two years of school and must have two years of sailing experience.' 61 A long haul captain, however, 'must complete a third year of study and have at least sixty months of sailing experience.' 62 While long haul captains and lieutenants served on the bridge, officer mechanics worked as marine engineers and often oversaw the black gang. 63 The EAM typically trained aspiring crewmembers who, after nine months of courses, received a Certificate of Fitness that permitted them to embark as ship's boys or novices. 64

Within the shipping industry more broadly, industry elites also helped cultivate notions of skill. According to Michael Miller, detailed knowledge of all elements of shipping was a significant component of how executives and their agents imagined themselves to be experts. He describes a maritime culture of expertise informed by a commanding acumen about the industry, but also, significantly, by networking. Miller describes how a mobile, educated, cosmopolitan class of men developed 'a lifetime of contacts with men like themselves' by 'shuttling from one port assignment to  another,  traveling  overseas  on  business  trips,  [attending]  business lunches,  dinners,  and  club  gatherings,  [and]  congregating  at  the exchanges.' 65 For Miller, expertise 'defined who was an insider.' 66 Understandings of expertise depended not only on what you knew, but on who you knew. Significantly, this maritime business culture was a highly gendered and racialized space. Those who could have and produce knowledge about shipping were understood to be part of a cosmopolitan, well-traveled cohort of white, bourgeois men.

Membership in professional maritime associations exemplifies how expertise was linked to one's status as an industry insider. One such

ociety,  the  Association  technique  maritime et aéronautique (The Mars itime and Aeronautical Technical Association, or ATMA), drew its membership  from  France's  most  elite  marine  engineering  and  technical schools, industry executives, and even former presidents of the republic. The ATMA also had broad international ties. Participants in the 1948 annual conference and banquet, for example, included naval engineers, naval architects, shipbuilders, presidents of shipping companies, and admirals  from  the  United  States,  Denmark,  Spain,  Holland,  and  the United Kingdom. 67

Not all members of the shipping industry were part of these elite networks and not all merchant marines were trained at special schools. A certain percentage joined the merchant marine through altogether different channels. Colonial sailors, for example, were often hired through informal and often illicit networks in port cities around the empire. Without the legitimacy that came along with being officially certified by a school like the EAM or ENMM, colonial sailors had to look elsewhere for evidence in support of their arguments about their expertise. Specifically, French colonial sailors invoked the civilizing mission. They did so by pledging their loyalty to the Union française and by making the case that, as ostensible beneficiaries of France's mission to civilize, they were indeed bien élevés . They exploited the implied promise at the heart of the civilizing mission, namely that with hard work colonial subjects could someday become fully French. They argued that they were already productive members of the imperial nation-state, and that their expertise as merchant marines proved their utility to the polity.

In correspondence with government officials, colonial sailors sought to  demonstrate their loyalty to the empire by describing their earnest labor. In a 1954 letter, Formose Gomis, president of the Association des africains de la France d'Outre-Mer, wrote to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect: 'I … along with my sailor comrades, want you to know that we are all brave and honest men who want to earn our daily bread by the sweat of our brows.' 68 In another letter, Gomis highlighted his military service in the Free French Forces: 'Former soldier and loyal subject to France … I represent the majority of my comrades, sailors from black Africa.' 69 In referencing their military service, representatives from the Union des marins de l'Afrique noire argued that they had fulfilled their responsibilities as Frenchmen and now the Union française was obliged to help them find work: 'it wasn't necessary to ask many of these men of color to carry out their duty as Frenchmen … [France] must not only need them for war.' 70 Such arguments reflect their understandings of labor, but also recall Gregory Mann's notion of the 'blood debt' that many African veterans felt was owed them by France. 71

Significantly,  unemployed colonial sailors made the case that they deserved to be regarded as experts because they were bien élevés . The verb, élever , means to be well raised-even well bred; to be educated; to be elevated. The term has a particular meaning in the imperial context. As part of France's special mission to 'uplift' colonial peoples, élever was utilized to describe their level of civilization, or 'Frenchness.' Notions of élévation were central to the hierarchical logic of the mission civilisatrice . Following this logic, colonial subjects could not yet be full French citizens because they were not yet ready; they were always in the process of becoming more élevés . Although some colonial subjects were marked as more civilized than others and received special privileges, at its root, élévation was a perpetual state of becoming. But in claiming to be bien élevés, African sailors  turned  this  logic  on  its  head.  They  asserted  that  they  were  no longer in the process of becoming civilized: they were already there, because  the  mission  had  succeeded.  For  example,  in  a  1954  letter Hyacinthe Gomis condemned what he described as the 'racist' discrimination perpetuated by the navigation companies and asserted that 'we were  raised  [ élévons ]  against  such  practices.' 72 Gomis  thus  adroitly exposed one of the central paradoxes of the imperial nation-state, namely, that republicanism relied on racism to make claims about equality and the universalism of human rights. Gomis asserted that he and his comrades  had  indeed  learned  the  lessons  of  republicanism-they  were 'raised' to do so-and now they claimed their place as full citizens of the empire. Not only were they experts at their craft, they were capable workers precisely because of the extensive training they had received-from birth-as part of the civilizing mission.

In asserting that they had learned the lessons of the civilizing mission and now demanded to be treated as full citizens, African sailors helped to shape another logic integral to the imperial project: the construction of hierarchical categories of race. Although unemployed sailors sometimes characterized  themselves  as  a  homogenous  group  and  even  joined together in solidarity at times to represent their collective interests, they were also exceptionally diverse and came from all parts of Africa. They did not always get along. The shrinking number of jobs contributed to longstanding hostilities and fierce competition among unemployed sailors. In making their case to authorities about their own expertise, colonial sailors often described the ineptitude and racial differences of seamen from other parts of the empire.

Navigation companies believed that only certain types of men could work in the engine rooms and, moreover, that some of these men were better at their jobs than others. One dominant assumption was that 'Arabs,' specifically those from Yemen and Djibouti, were more able than

men from French colonies in sub-Saharan Africa. A report sent to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect detailed the partialities of navigation companies who 'prefer to employ metropolitans to blacks … and … [prefer] the employment of Arab Yemenis to Arab Somalis,' followed by 'Black Somalis.' 73 In other words, 'metropolitan,' meaning white French or European sailors, were most desired to work aboard ships; but in the engine room, 'Arabs' were preferred over 'blacks' for 'reasons of productivity.' 74 This preference for sailors from Yemen, especially those from the British-controlled port city of Aden, over seamen from within the French empire is curious. European navigation companies believed that Arabs from Yemen must be better sailors-even though they could still only work in the engine rooms-because of the historical maritime presence of Arabs along the coast of East Africa and in the Indian Ocean. Shipping companies maintained this belief even though people from the eastern coasts of Africa had been active in the maritime and trading world of the Red Sea and Indian Ocean for centuries. 75

Sailors from sub-Saharan Africa contradicted this consensus by arguing that they, not Arabs, were more qualified and better sailors. They complained  bitterly  to  French  authorities  about  what  they  saw  as  plain preferential treatment for Arab sailors by shipping companies. In a letter to the prefect, Formose Gomis described the 'favoritism' shown to Arab sailors  and  how 'people of color ( les  gens  de  couleur )  are  systematically excluded in favor of Arabs.' 76 Significantly,  sub-Saharan African sailors employed the language of expertise and technical knowledge to make the case for why their labor should be preferred over that of 'Arabs.' In a 1953 letter, Ousmane Sakho implored the Haut commissaire de l'AOF to 'intervene on our behalf with the navigation companies' and to affirm the 'capacities' of sailors from sub-Saharan Africa, insisting that 'Arabs from Yemen' were, by contrast, 'not capable.' 77 Representatives from the Union des marins de l'Afrique noire similarly insisted that Arab sailors, whom the union described as 'foreigners,' lacked the 'specialized knowledge' to adequately perform their duties aboard cargo ships. 78 Finally, in a 1954 letter, Ousmane Sakho and Amadou Sy drew distinctions between Arabs  'originally  from  Yemen'  and  'we  who  are  from  the  French colonies.' Sakho and Sy were incredulous that they and their countrymen, who were actually part of the French empire, could be passed over. 79 They argued that their military service to the empire and the fact that they technically had French citizenship should afford some preference for their labor over other outsiders.

By contrast, Arab sailors insisted that they were the victims of discrimination perpetuated by sub-Saharan Africans. In a letter to the prefect, Radih Abdoul Gabar, president of the Société d'entre-aide et d'assistance

des arabes de Djibouti, asserted that 'black Somalis have always had an implacable hatred towards Arabs … who come from Yemen and Arabia.' 80 He claimed that Arabs in Marseille were the 'victims of these persecutions … because of the well-known professional rivalries for [jobs with] the navigation companies.' 81

French colonial sailors affirmed their expertise by 'othering' sailors who were from other parts of the French empire, or from other empires altogether. For the most part, state authorities and ship-owners reproduced and embellished this racialized discourse about technical expertise. While French colonial sailors often characterized other seamen as technologically and racially inferior, state officials and ship owners took this reasoning one step further in their efforts to modernize the fleet. They applied the same logic to all colonial sailors on the grounds that they formed a homogenous group of laboring men who had no place in the changing global market.

As unemployment levels among colonial sailors continued to rise in the early 1950s, state authorities, select ship owners, and colonial sailors themselves proposed a number of solutions to the crisis. African sailors and state authorities agreed-to a certain extent-that their skills could be utilized in other industries. Such proposals were significant because they suggested that colonial sailors' labor had value beyond the narrow scope of  the  engine  room.  These  conversations  also  anticipated  the broader debate about decolonization. In 1954, France lost the war in Indochina and the Algerian War of independence began to intensify. These conflicts, along with ongoing labor unrest in West Africa, challenged the viability of the Union française and, indeed, of the civilizing mission. By making an argument about the fungibility of their skills, colonial sailors suggested a pathway beyond the prescribed course of la mission civilisatrice . In short, their claims implied that the civilizing mission could have an endpoint, and, moreover, that their expertise had a place in the postcolonial global economy.

In recommending various solutions to the unemployment crisis, colonial sailors pointed out that the simplest, most natural remedy was to hire them to work aboard new diesel ships. They argued that they could easily do different jobs; their technological knowledge was not limited to performing only the most menial-and increasingly obsolete-labor aboard coal-powered  steamships.  Correspondence  between  the  Bouches-duRhône prefect, the high commissioner of the AOF and AEF, and state maritime authorities shows that they too entertained this possibility, albeit briefly. State authorities wondered if shipping companies could be incentivized to hire African sailors on ships that serviced colonial ports. In one 1953 memo, Bouches-du-Rhône Prefect René Paira asked the head of the

maritime labor office: 'Could we not require the navigation companies to reserve a portion (around thirty percent) of their future vacant positions for sailors from the overseas territories on lines serving those regions?' 82 This proposal, however, was quickly shot down by the Inscription maritime, which claimed that strict labor codes prevented the government from interfering in the hiring decisions of shipping companies. 83 Instead, the agency recommended either 'returning [these men] to the AOF … or retraining them in another trade.' 84

Repatriation  became  a  popular  solution  bandied  about  by  state authorities in multiple government agencies, but African sailors dismissed this suggestion outright. In a 1954 letter to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, Ousmane Sakho and Amadou Sy stated simply: 'We don't want to be repatriated, we want to work.' 85 In other letters, unemployed sailors pointed out that many of them had lived in Marseille for decades. Home, for them, was in the metropole.

On the possibility of working in other industries, however, both state authorities and unemployed sailors found common ground. They agreed that if  no  jobs  were  available  in  the  merchant  marines, unemployed sailors could put their skills to use in altogether new jobs in, for example, construction or manufacturing. As representatives from the Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and the Amicale des originaires de la côte française Somalis wrote to the prefect: 'We are ready to energetically work with the Direction de la main-d'oeuvre to hire [men] in different enterprises.' 86 A memo from the state secretary of Overseas France to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect similarly recommended the swift placement of 'former sailors … in industries here in the Bouches-du-Rhône.' 87 This unanimity suggests that state authorities and African sailors shared some consensus about the fungibility of their skills. Colonial sailors declared that the civilizing mission had worked and their expertise therefore had utility  beyond the confines of ships' engine rooms. Such claims also implied that their labor was valuable outside the boundaries of the imperial  nation-state.  Many state authorities, concerned about the growing problem of 'black unemployment' in French ports, agreed that African sailors' labor had broad utility.

Despite  this  accord,  tensions  over  understandings  of  expertise remained. Representatives of colonial sailors asserted that all African men were able to do new kinds of jobs in other industries. In their eyes, unemployed sailors already possessed many of the skills necessary to work in construction sites or factories and only required some minor 'professional retraining.' 88 By contrast, officials at the prefecture believed that only 'a small number of unemployed Africans could enter … into job training centers' because 'the majority have an inferior degree of evolution.' 89

Correspondence between various government agencies reveals the extent to which racialized assumptions about ability framed understandings of colonial sailors' technical knowledge. On one hand, state authorities were willing to concede that some African sailors had made a fairly convincing case about the success of the civilizing mission and that their labor had worth within the broader economy. On the other hand, the perception that only a limited number of African sailors had actually succeeded in becoming 'civilized' reflected many of the tensions at the heart of the colonial question.

In 1950s Marseille, unemployed sailors from French Africa made the case that they were technological agents capable of adroitly navigating the changing French shipping industry. In doing so, they helped to both challenge and shape dominant discourses about race, masculinity, and expertise in post-World War II France. As the merchant navy transitioned to diesel ships in the 1950s and then participated in the containerization revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, most unemployed colonial sailors never did find work aboard these new vessels. Some sought temporary gigs working as casual laborers on Marseille docks. 90 Many others formed part of the growing force of former colonial subjects who helped make the postwar economic miracle possible by working on construction sites, building les grands ensembles , or toiling in factories. Although state officials and shipping executives retained a broader skepticism about the abilities and know-how of the colonized, colonial migrants nonetheless played an integral role in the vast twentieth-century project to modernize metropolitan France. As part of this workforce, African sailors claimed that their expertise developed from the extensive training they had received as so-called beneficiaries of the civilizing mission. Significantly, such arguments about the 'success' of the mission also implied that it had an endpoint.

Their campaign, therefore, also raises important questions about the end of empire, specifically the broad commitment articulated by the global north to 'develop' Africa. As has been widely noted by scholars, late-twentieth-century development initiatives cannot be divorced from their imperial origins. 91 France's 1956 Defferre Law, which outlined a pathway to independence for most of French Africa, is a case in point. It highlighted the role of western experts in charting a guided 'evolution' of French colonies on the road to statehood. As former colonies began to join the international community of sovereign states, modernization was widely embraced by the 'developed' and 'developing' world alike. Significantly,  a  new  marker  of  universal  progress-expert-ness-rose  to prominence, diminishing the historical trope of the civilizing mission. In this evolving postcolonial moment, African sailors called into question this very notion of expertise. By arguing that their skills were fungible and

could be put to use in shipping and other industries, they showed how perceptions of gender and race framed assumptions about who could produce knowledge and be an expert in the decolonizing world. 92  Most significantly, African sailors challenged the idea that technological change was natural and that, by extension, progress was inevitable.

MINAYO NASIALI is an associate professor of history at the University of California-Los Angeles. Her book, Native to the Republic: Empire, Social Citizenship, and Everyday Life in Marseille since 1945 , was published by Cornell University Press in 2016. Her work has appeared in the American Historical Review and the Journal of Urban History and she is currently researching a new project on shipping and empire in twentieth-century France. Email: mnasiali@history.ucla.edu

## Notes

- 1. Memo, Affaire Mamadou Koita, from le délégué du Service des affaires sociales d'Outre-Mer  to  the  Bouches-du-Rhône  prefect,  30  April  1954,  Archives départementales des Bouches-du-Rhône (hereafter: ADBDR), 148 W 39.
- 2. For a European history of the merchant marines in the twentieth century see Michael B. Miller, Europe and the Maritime World: A Twentieth-Century History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
- 3. Scholarship on expertise has done the important work of discussing how knowledge is produced and how networks of power shape discourse. See Paul Rabinow, French Modern: Norms and Forms of the Social Environment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 9. See also Gabrielle Hecht, The Radiance of France: Nuclear Power and National Identity after World War II (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998) and Sheila Jasanoff, ed., States of Knowledge: The Co-Production of  Science  and  Social  Order (London: Routledge, 2004). For other discussions about technocrats and state institutions see Richard Kuisel, Capitalism and the State in Modern France: Renovation and Economic Management in the Twentieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981). On expertise and post-World War II modernization see Kenny Cupers, The Social Project: Housing Postwar France (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014).
- 4. For the classic study of the civilizing mission see Alice Conklin, A Mission to Civilize : The Republican Idea of Empire in France and West (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997). For scholarship on empire, hierarchical regimes of knowledge, and the management of colonial peoples and places see Gwendolyn Wright, The Politics of Design in French Colonial Urbanism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991) and Zeynep Celik, Urban Forms and Colonial Confrontations: Algiers under French Rule (Berkeley: University of California Press,  1997).  On  colonies  as  laboratories  for  experiments  in  modernity  see Isabel  Hull, Absolute Destruction: Military Culture and the Practices of War in Imperial Germany (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005) and Amelia Lyons, The Civilizing Mission in the Metropole: Algerian Families and the French Welfare State during Decolonization (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2013).

- 5. Ann Game and Rosemary Pringle, Gender at Work (North Sydney: Allen &amp; Unwin, 1983), 17.
- 6. See, for example, Harry Braveman's classic study, Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974).
- 7. Gabrielle Hecht quote in David Serlin, 'Confronting African Histories of Technology: A Conversation with Keith Breckenridge and Gabrielle Hecht,' Radical History Review 127 (January 2017): 86-102, here 96. For a discussion of race and stereotyping in the South African mining industry see Jeff Guy and Motlatsi  Thabane, 'Technology, Ethnicity and Ideology: Basotho Miners and Shaft-Sinking on the South African Gold Mines,' Journal of Southern African Studies 14, 2 (January 1988): 257-278. For studies of masculinity, labor, and expertise see Keith Breckenridge, 'The Allure of Violence: Men, Race and Masculinity on the South African Goldmines, 1900-1950,' Journal of Southern African  Studies 24,  4  (December  1998):  669-693  and  Laura  Ann  Twagira, ''Robot Farmers' and Cosmopolitan Workers: Technological Masculinity and Agricultural Development in the French Soudan (Mali), 1945-68,' Gender &amp; History 26, 3 (November 2014): 459-477. Scholarship on cultures of technological  knowledge  and  'unsanctioned'  centers  of  technological  training includes Robyn D'Avignon, 'Making 'Artisanal' Miners: Nature, Knowledge, and Subterranean History in Senegal' (Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 2016) and Joshua Grace, 'Modernization Bubu : Cars, Roads, and the Politics of Development in Tanzania, 1870s to 1980s' (Ph.D. diss., Michigan State University, 2013).
- 8. On the interwar origins of development see Frederick Cooper and Randall Packard, eds., International Development and the Social Sciences: Essays on the History and Politics of Knowledge (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997). On development questions more broadly see Walter Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa (Washington D.C.: Howard University Press, 1981) and Frédérique Apffel Marglin and Stephen Marglin, eds., Dominating Knowledge: Development, Culture, and Resistance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990).
- 9. Letter from Hyacinthe Gomis to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 29 December 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 10. Letter from L'Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and L'Amicale des originaires de la côte française Somalis to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 18 May 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 11. Letter from Ousmane Sakho and Amadou Sy to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 23 April 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 12. Amicale des originaires de la côte française des Somalis de France à Marseille to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 23 September 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 13. Letter from Akona N'Diaye to Monsieur Hutard, December 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 1-2.
- 14. Syndicat marseillais de la Marine marchande to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 23 October 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 3.
- 15. Note. Sur la situation à Marseille des marins de commerce originaires du continent africain, 26 January 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 139, 1.
- 16. See Note pour le préfet sur la situation des originaires d'Afrique noire résidant à Marseille, 3 June 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 17. Vaclav Smil, Two Prime Movers of Globalization : The History and Impact of Diesel Engines and Gas Turbines (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2010), 112.

- 18. Ibid.
- 19. For a description of the impact of the oil-tanker and petroleum shipping on the industry see Miller, Maritime World , 307-308.
- 20. For  studies  of  the  French  Merchant  Marines  see  Bernard  Cassagnou, Les Grandes Mutations de la Marine marchande française (1945-1995), vol. 1 and vol. 2 (Paris: Comité pour l'histoire économique et financière de la France, 2002) and Ronan Viaud, Le  Syndicalisme  maritime  français:  Les  organisations,  les hommes, les luttes (1890-1950) (Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes, 2005). For scholarship on French maritime history more broadly: Cyrill P. Coutansais, L'Empire des mers: Atlas historique de la France maritime (Paris: CNRS, 2015) and Jean-Louis Miège, Navigations et migrations en Méditerranée: De la Préhistoire à nos jours (Paris: Éditions du CNRS, 1983).
- 21. Smil, Two Prime Movers , 112.
- 22. Miller, Maritime World , 34.
- 23. See Cassagnou, Les Grandes Mutations , 194-195, and Miller, Maritime World , 311. For company histories that include details about the post-1945 reconstruction of the fleet see Jean Beaugé and René-Pierre Cogan, Histoire maritime des  Chargeurs Réunis et de leurs filiales (Paris:  Barré  and  Dayez,  1984)  and Charles Limonier ,  Les 110 ans de la Havraise Péninsulaire: Histoire de la flotte (Marseille: P. Tacussel, 1992).
- 24. Cassagnou, Les Grandes Mutations , 194.
- 25. For example, the Compagnie Fraissinet was created in 1836 in the wake of the 1830 invasion of Algeria and an early incarnation of the Messageries maritimes, the Messageries imperiales, served French interests in Indochina and Africa.  Cassagnou, Les  Grandes Mutations , 314. For a discussion of imperial enterprises in French colonies see Catherine Coquery-Vidrovitch, Le Congo au temps des grandes compagnies concessionnaires, 1898-1930 (Paris: Mouton &amp; Co, 1972).
- 26. Assumptions about colonial sailors' supposed lack of skill were also pervasive in the British merchant marines. For discussion of Indian sailors in the British Merchant Marines see Globalizing Labour? Indian Seafarers and World Shipping, c. 1870-1945 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012). For studies of empire and the British maritime world more broadly see David Cannadine, ed., Empire, the Sea and Global History: Britain's Maritime World, c. 1760-1840 (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007); Freda Harcourt, Flagships of Imperialism: The P &amp; O Company and the Politics of Empire from its Origins to 1867 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2006). On race and empire in the British maritime world see Ray Costello, Black Salt: Seafarers of African Descent on British Ships (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2012); Laura Tabili, We Ask for British Justice: Workers and Racial Difference in Late Imperial Britain (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1944); and Laura Tabili, Global Migrants, Local Culture: Natives and Newcomers in Provincial England, 1841-1939 (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).
- 27. Laura Frader, 'Labor History after the Gender Turn: Transatlantic Cross Currents and Research Agendas,' International Labor and Working Class History 63 (Spring 2003): 21-31, here 21. Scholarship on gender and technology includes Ruth  Oldenziel, Making  Technology  Masculine:  Men,  Women  and  Modern Machines in America, 1870-1945 (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1999); Nina E. Leman, Ruth Oldenziel, and Arwen Mohun, eds., Gender and Technology: A Reader (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003).

- 28. Gopalan Balachandran, Globalizing Labour? Indian Seafarers and World Shipping, c. 1870-1945 (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2012), 37-38.
- 29. Ibid., 37.
- 30. Balachandran, Globalizing Labour? 108.
- 31. Ibid., 108-109.
- 32. Ibid., 109.
- 33. http://www.barrymerchantseamen.org.uk/articles/BMSfiretrim.html.
- 34. Balachandran, Globalizing Labour? 109.
- 35. http://www.usmm.org/engine.html.
- 36. L'Union maritime de Marseille to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 20 October 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 37. Syndicat Marseillais de la Marine Marchande to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 23 October 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 2.
- 38. Ibid.
- 39. Ibid.
- 40. Sonya Rose, Limited Livelihoods: Gender and Class in Nineteenth-Century England (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 22-23.
- 41. For work on masculinity and empire see Mrinalini Sinha, Colonial Masculinity: The 'Manly Englishman' and the 'Effeminate Benglali' in the late Nineteenth Century (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1995).
- 42. Letter from Hyacinthe Gomis, Délégué permanent de l'Association des originaires de l'AOF et de l'AEF, 15 September 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 43. Ibid.
- 44. L'Union des marins de l'Afrique noire, no date, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 45. Letter from Hyacinthe Gomis.
- 46. Letter from L'Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and L'Amicale des originaires de la côte française somalis.
- 47. L'Union des marins de l'Afrique noire, no date, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 48. Letter from L'Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and L'Amicale des originaires de la côte française Somalis, underscore in original.
- 49. Syndicat marseillais de la Marine marchande to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 23 October 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 1.
- 50. Ibid.
- 51. L'Union maritime de Marseille to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect.
- 52. Ruth  Oldenziel, Making  Technology  Masculine:  Men,  Women  and  Modern Machines in America 1870-1945 (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1999).
- 53. Letter to Henry Bergasse, Député des Bouches-du-Rhône, 7 January 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 1.
- 54. Ibid.
- 55. Ibid.
- 56. On France's special mission to civilize see Conklin, A Mission to Civilize ; Elizabeth Thompson, Colonial Citizens: Republican Rights, Paternal Privilege and Gender in French Syria and Lebanon (New York: Columbia University Press, 1999); and Patricia Lorcin, Imperial Identities: Stereotyping, Prejudice and Race in Colonial Algeria (New York: I. B. Tauris and Co. Ltd, 1995).
- 57. For studies on eugenics and biological notions of race see Richard Sonn, 'Your Body Is Yours: Anarchism, Birth Control, and Eugenics in Interwar France,' Journal of the History of Sexuality 14, 4 (2005); Götz Aly, Peter Chroust, and Christian Pross, Cleansing the Fatherland: Nazi Medicine and Racial Hygiene (Bal-

imore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994); Robert A. Nye, Crime, Madness, &amp; Politics in Modern France: The Medical Concept of National Decline (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984); and Stefan Kühl, The Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism, and German National Socialism (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).

- 58. http://www.igam.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/enseignement-maritimer12.html.
- 59. Cassagnou, Les Grandes Mutations , 393.
- 60. Ibid., 394.
- 61. Ibid., 15.
- 62. Ibid.
- 63. In 1950, the ENMM issued 1,218 Captain-Long Haul diplomas, 449 Lieutenant-Long Haul, and 1,104 Officer Mechanic-First Class diplomas. Ibid., 394.
- 64. In 1950, the EAM issued approximately 1,200 certificates. Ibid., 394.
- 65. Miller, Europe and the Maritime World , 200-201.
- 66. Ibid., 199.
- 67. Félix Faure, the then president of France, served as honorary head of the organization from 1894 until his death in 1899. Association technique maritime et aéronautique, Annuaire (Paris:  Association  technique maritime et aéronautique, 1948), 43.
- 68. Letter from Gomis-Formose [sic], Président de l'UFNOM to Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 31 May 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 69. Letter  from Formose Gomis, Président de l'Association des Africains de la France d'outre-mer to prefect, 4 May 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 70. L'Union des marins de l'Afrique noire, no date, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 71. Gregory Mann, Native Sons: West African Veterans and France in the Twentieth Century (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006).
- 72. Letter from Hyacinthe Gomis.
- 73. Note. Sur la situation à Marseille des marins de commerce originaires du continent africain, 1.
- 74. Ibid.
- 75. For studies of East African maritime cultures see Jonathan Miran, Red Sea Citizens: Cosmopolitan Society and Cultural Change in Massawa (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009) and John Horton and John Middleton, The Swahili: The Social Landscape of a Mercantile Society (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000).
- 76. Letter  from Formose Gomis, President de l'Association des Africains de la France d'outre-mer to prefect, 4 May 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 77. Letter from Ousmane Sokho [sic] to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 4 November 1953, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 78. Union des marins de l'Afrique Noire, no date, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 79. Letter from Ousmane Sakho and Amadou Sy to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 23 April 1954, ADBDR, 148 W 389.
- 80. Radih Abdoul Gabar, président de la société d'entre-aide et d'assistance des arabes de Djibouti to the prefect, April 1952, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 1.
- 81. Ibid., 2.
- 82. Le préfet des Bouches-du-Rhône to Monsieur l'administrateur chef de l'ins  cription Maritime, 28 October 1953, ADBDR, 148 W 39.
- 83. Inscription maritime, Quartier de Marseille to Monsieur le préfet des Bouchesdu-Rhône, 3 November 1953, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 1.
- 84. Ibid., 3.

- 85. Letter from Ousmane Sakho and Amadou Sy.
- 86. Letter from L'Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and L'Amicale des originaires de la côte française Somalis.
- 87. Secrétaire d'état à la France d'outre-mer to the Bouches-du-Rhône prefect, 6 October 1953, ADBDR, 148 W 39, 2.
- 88. Letter from L'Union des marins de l'AOF et de l'AEF and L'Amicale des originaires de la côte française Somalis.
- 89. Note pour le préfet sur la situation des originaires d'Afrique noire résidant à Marseille, 3. See also Note. Sur la situation à Marseille des marins de commerce originaires du continent africain.
- 90. See Minayo Nasiali, 'Trouble on the Docks: Strikes, Scabs and the Colonial Question in Marseille's Port Neighborhoods,' Journal of Urban History 42, 5 (September 2016): 900-918.
- 91. For discussion of the politics and practices of development see Frederick Cooper and Randall M. Packard, eds., International Development and the Social Sciences: Essays on the History and Politics of Knowledge (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997). See also Kwame Nkrumah, Neo-Colonialism: The Last Stage of Imperialism (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, Ltd., 1965); Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa ; and Frederick Cooper, Africa since 1940: The Past of the Present (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
- 92. Colonial sailors thus helped to redress what Gabrielle Hecht calls the 'relentless  marginalization of Africa in scholarship on globalization.' Gabrielle Hecht, 'Hope for the Radiated Body: Uranium Miners and the Transnational Technopolitics of Namibia,' Journal of African History 51 (2010), 214.