bs\_bs\_ban

er

## THE

## ECONOMIC HISTORY REVIEW

<!-- image -->

Economic History Review , 66, 3 (2013), pp. 693-714

## The lure of aggregates and the pitfalls of the patriarchal perspective:a critique of the high wage economy interpretation of the British industrial revolution 1

By JANE HUMPHRIES *

The new meta-narrative of the industrial revolution contends that Britain was a high wage economy and that this itself caused industrialization. Contemporary inventions, although derived from scientific discoveries shared with mainland Europe, could only be profitable in the context of Britain's factor prices.Therefore, important inventions were only developed in Britain where they enabled access to a growth path that transcended trajectories associated with more labour-intensive production methods. The criticism presented here concerns perspective and methodology.The account of the high wage economy is misleading because it focuses on men and male wages, underestimates the relative caloric needs of women and children, and bases its view picture of the structure and functioning of working-class households provides an alternative explanation of inventive and innovative activity in terms of the availability of cheap and amenable female and child labour and thereby offers a broader interpretation of the industrial revolution.

O ne cold winter morning in early nineteenth-century Essex, an agricultural labourer's family awoke to find they had no food in the house. While the mother swallowed her pride and went to tell the parson 'how she was situated', Bill, the oldest son, begged a local farmer to let him dig up some frozen turnips. Bill H\_\_\_\_ and his siblings were attempting to defrost the scavenged roots, when his mother returned with 'a lap-ful of broken victuals' and the family was saved. 2 This vivid glimpse of early nineteenth-century penury has survived because of Bill's ability, despite his lack of schooling, to write a memoir with sufficient authenticity and flair that it caught the eye of the editor of Macmillan's Magazine , where it was published anonymously in 1861. The episode appears in the third paragraph of Bill's memoir, and follows a description of the poverty of his family and its economic and demographic causes:

I was born at Wimbush, near SaffronWalden, in Essex. My father was a labouring man, earning nine shillings a week at the best of times; but often his wages were reduced to seven shillings.

- 1 I would like to thank Carol Heim, Pat Hudson, Deborah Oxley, Eric Schneider, Mark Stelzner, and four anonymous referees for comments on earlier versions of this article.The research was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council through my Professorial Fellowship, 'Memories of Industriousness:The Household Economy in Britain, 1700-1878'. An earlier version of this article was presented at a one-day workshop on 'The Lure of Aggregates' at the University of Reading, 30 March 2011.

© Economic History Society 2012. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

## JANE HUMPHRIES

There was a wonderful large family of us-eleven was born, but we died down to six. I remember one winter, we was very bad off, for we boys could get no employment, and no one in the family was working but father. He only got fourteen pence a day to keep eight of us in firing and everything. It was a hard matter to get enough to eat. 3

Bill's family circumstances are presented as in no way unusual. They are replicated many times over in other accounts of working-class life at this time, and square with the consensus among poor law historians that 'the evidence of acute poverty in the last decades of the old poor law is overpowering'. 4 Yet such micro history stands in sharp contrast to the new meta-narrative of the industrial revolution, which confidently contends that Britain was a high wage economy and that the high wages themselves caused industrialization. The model is seductively simple. Allen, its leading proponent, uses real wage series for eighteenth-century London labourers and craftsmen to argue that British wages were high in four different ways: relative to the past; relative to the rest of the world including continental Europe; relative to the price of capital; and relative to the price of coal. 5 The resulting factor price frontier meant that contemporary inventions, although derived from scientific discoveries shared with mainland Europe, could only yield profits in Britain. Therefore, they were only developed and made operational in Britain. Within this paradigm of industrialization, the famous inventors, those great golden men of the industrial revolution, continue to be celebrated, but their real contribution lies not in technological genius but in seizing the opportunities created by relatively cheap capital and fuel to dispense with relatively expensive labour. Allen's story is that the key inventions of the industrial revolution, the spinning jenny, the steam engine, and the smelting of iron ore using coal, were only economically viable where it made sense to substitute relatively cheap capital and coal for relatively expensive labour. Once adopted, these macro inventions put Britain on a growth path that transcended the trajectories associated with more labour-intensive production methods, and the rest is history!

Although Allen's refurbishment and relocation of the Habakkuk thesis has some critics, with the monograph version selected as one of the best books of 2009 by the Economist and already widely cited, it is well on the way to becoming the mainstream account of the early twenty-first century. 6 The focus of this article is less on relative wage levels between Britain and competitor would-be industrializers. It is probably true that relatively high British wages disadvantaged industries such as cotton in comparison with (say) Indian competitors and induced the adoption of more capital-intensive production methods. 7 On the other hand, Indian competitors were largely excluded from domestic and colonial markets where the bulk of cottons were sold and factors other than price competitiveness

such as design, colour, and speed of delivery were important in consumer goods markets, as other commentators have emphasized. 8 We will return later to the comparative dimensions of the debate.The main criticism presented in this article concerns perspective and methodology and begins with the claim that wages at the end of the eighteenth century were historically high and provided a living standard 'far above bare bones subsistence'. 9 The account of the high wage economy is misleading because it focuses on men and male wages, underestimates the relative caloric needs of women and children, and bases its view of living standards on an ahistorical and false household economy.The criticism is developed in five stages: the first uses Allen's own exemplar working-class household to come to very different preliminary conclusions; the second establishes the building blocks of the high wage economy in terms of men's earnings and a poverty line based on minimal standards; the third looks in detail at the definition of this poverty line and particularly the required conversion of women and children to adult male equivalents; the fourth constructs a more reasonable and historically grounded workingclass household economy; and the fifth uses this to develop an alternative explanation of inventive and innovative activity based on the availability of cheap and amenable female and child labour and thereby to offer a broader interpretation of the industrial revolution.

I

An earlier (and for many years dominant) interpretation of the industrial revolution based on an aggregate quantitative analysis was criticized by two distinguished regional economic historians for being too aggregative and exclusively quantitative. 10 Perhaps to forestall such criticism or to enliven the text for undergraduate consumption, Allen initially sets up his (high) wage series with reference to contemporary studies of working-class household budgets. 'Budget studies from the industrial revolution confirm the high standard of living. . . .'. 11 Reference here is to Sir Frederic Eden's three-volume enquiry into The state of the poor . 12 Out of the 53 budgets that Eden documents, Allen chooses the 40-year-old gardener living in Ealing (then just outside London) with a wife and four young children, 13 which he holds to be '[a] typical example'. 14 Allen describes the gardener as, by combining jobs, managing to earn 30d. per day (15s. a week) 'which was a labourer's wage in London in the 1790s'. 15 This wage delivered a comfortable living standard: the gardener could afford meat, tea, and sugar, schooling for older

- 9 Allen, British industrial revolution , p. 29; considerable evidence exists to suggest that neither real wages nor living standards rose monotonically through the eighteenth century. Most recently, Muldrew, Food , has suggested a deterioration in diet between the early and late eighteenth century, (although his levels of food availability seem out of line with other authors and will likely be questioned); and Allen's own work acknowledges a climacteric in real wages in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; see Allen, 'Engels' pause'.
- 10 Berg and Hudson, 'Rehabilitating'.
- 11 Allen, British industrial revolution , p.29.
- 12 Eden, State . For a discussion of the representativeness of Eden's budgets, see Brunt, 'Advent of the sample survey'.
- 13 Eden, State , pp. 241-2.
- 14 Allen, British industrial revolution , p. 29.
- 15 Ibid., p. 29.

children, coal for winter fuel, and rent of a house with garden. He was, according to Allen, 'living towards the top of Engel's [ sic ] meat scale and far above bare bones subsistence'. 16 However, Allen does not use the Ealing gardener's budget to argue about wages and living standards by combining it with other analogous accounts. 17 It is cited only to anticipate findings from the aggregate analysis of wages: for support rather than illumination. 'Representativeness of budgets like this is of course a question.We will address this later by calculating what people could afford to buy with the incomes they earned.The calculations confirm that the lifestyle of the Ealing gardener was within the reach of many Brits'. 18 Amethodological divide opens between work which attempts to aggregate from the bottom up to check on the representativeness of the average account and work which cherry-picks individual cases to support findings from other (perhaps more conventional) sources.

Before leaving the Ealing gardener, his case deserves closer attention, chosen as it was for its alleged typicality. It is worth quoting Eden in full:

The following are the earnings and expenses of a labourer, aged about 40, employed regularly throughout the year in a gentleman's fields and gardens. His weekly wages are 11s., but sometimes he works by the piece, when he makes 3s. a day easily. His hours of work are in summer from 6 to 6, in winter from day-light to dark. He has a wife and four children (2 boys aged 8 and 6, two girls 4 and 1 1 /2). Earnings: Regular weekly wages annually, £28 12s.: extra by piece work from employer, £6; ditto from other people, after usual work hours, £3. His wife does a little work in hay harvest about £1.Total £38 12s. Expenses: Rent for a cottage and small garden, £3 18s. His family consume a quartern loaf of bread a day, which at 10d. comes to £15 3s. and 4d.; meat £4 11s.; small beer, 4 quarts at 6d. weekly, or yearly £1 6s.; cheese, £1; estimated consumption of tea, 2oz. a week, at 4s. per lb.; sugar at 9d.; soap, 1 / 2lb. weekly at 9d.; candles, about 10s., or altogether, £6 7s.; coals, one bushel a week at 1s. 6d., which for 26 weeks is £1 19s. He uses two pairs of shoes a year (7s. 6d. each, 1s. mending), or yearly 16s.; 3 pairs of stockings (2s. a pair), 6s.; an old coat about 7s.; shirts, 10s.; other articles, 10s.; yearly expenditure on clothes, £2 9s. His wife's clothes not more than £1 1s. The two eldest children learn to read at a day school at 3d. a week, each £1 6s.Total expenses, £39 0s. 4d. Nothing is charged for clothing the children, as the wife contrives to provide them from her husband's old clothes, and from presents of linen which she receives on lying-in, etc. The man is allowed from his master's garden what potatoes and other vegetables he has occasion for, and about a quart of skim milk from the dairy every morning. Notwithstanding, he complains heavily of the hardness of the times, and says his earnings are barely sufficient to pay his expenses. He is now asking for an increase in wages. 19

The extended account certainly shades the sketch offered to illustrate the high wage economy. The subject is both a gardener and an agricultural labourer. His regular wages are in fact only 11s. rather than 15s. a week and it is only sometimes that he has access to the piecework, which boosts his earnings. Moreover these extras involve him working 'after usual hours'-hours already revealed as from '6 to 6' or 'daylight to dark'-that is, after a 12-hour day. Gifts from the man's employer and access to a cottage garden appear crucial to the range and sufficiency of the diet. The clothing budget is hugely problematic; apparently the children

would go naked to school were it not that the wife's cleverness with her needle enables her to manufacture apparel for them out of the gardener's cast-offs and gifts of linen from her lying in. Her clothes budget is also squeezed and there is no provision for a midwife or other care during childbirth. The Ealing gardener himself fails to appreciate that he is part of a high wage economy, complaining about hard times and wanting a pay increase. One cannot help but wonder what his wife might have added!

## II

Close inspection of one account, whose representativeness is moot, cannot get us very far, and indeed Allen's methodology is very different. He defines living standards as the quotient of average wages and the cost of various consumption bundles that represent different standards of living, beginning with a subsistence bundle. Thus, the building blocks for the high wage economy include: building labourers' and craftsmen's wages (in much of Allen's work converted into grams of silver to facilitate international comparisons); baskets of consumption goods representing subsistence and respectable living standards (again often converted to grams of silver); and, since the consumption baskets delivering living standards are defined for a single adult male, conversion factors to convert families of an assumed size and structure to adult male equivalents. It is not the aim of this article to question the wages data, which is drawn from well-known sources, though since these relate primarily to London, they likely tell a more positive story than a series for a peripheral rural county or a more disadvantaged occupational group.Agricultural labourers constitute a sensible comparator since they remained the largest single occupational grouping and one known to have fared less well over the course of the industrial revolution. 20 Here the focus is on those other building blocks of the high wage economy: the construction of a poverty line consumption bundle, and particularly its extension from an individual wage earner to the consuming unit of a family, which involves reducing women and children to adult male equivalents and making assumptions about the size and structure of workingclass families.

In earlier articles, Allen constructs a subsistence basket in terms of the cheapest foodstuffs needed to secure a minimum caloric intake set at 1,941 kcals/day. 21 The cost of this basket establishes the poverty line. More recently, while reaffirming this benchmark, Allen also sketches a superior standard, which includes a more generous allowance of bread and so raises the daily consumption of calories from 1,941 to 2,500. 22 Again, the cost constitutes a yardstick, though now for 'respectability', and the extent to which average earnings stretches beyond the poverty line to afford respectability provides a measure of progress.

Both subsistence and respectability baskets are computed according to the needs of a single adult male. For household consuming units, the needs of other

dependent family members have to be translated into adult equivalents. Allen suggests a family multiple of three, reasoning that: 'Since the recommended calorie intake of a woman is less than that of a man, and since, of course, children need even fewer calories, we can say-reasoning rather loosely-that three 'baskets' . . . were needed to support a family with a father, a mother and some children'. 23 Thus, his poverty line 'is computed for a notional family of a man, a woman, and two children [and] the nonhousing component of their poverty line income is set equal to 3X the basket of goods'. 24 Three subsistence baskets would have yielded for family consumption 5,823 kcals/day (3 X 1,941) and 'would have put a four person family at the same level of nutrition as the man'. 25 Is this conversion reasonable? 26

## III

In the light of modern nutritional studies, Allen's subsistence appears rather meagre, and, on closer inspection, particularly insufficient with respect to women's energy needs with problematic and far-reaching implications. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in 1973 held that its reference man needed 3,000 calories per day with 2,600 kcals/day allocated to maintenance and 400 kcals/day to moderate activity.The FAO's 1985 new energy requirement indices cover a range of body sizes, patterns of physical activity, and needs for compensatory growth. In 2002 the FAO updated tables suggest that men aged 18-29 doing moderate physical activity and of mid-size need 2,650-3,035 kcal/day. 27 To justify his much lower subsistence requirement, Allen cites the 'adaptation hypothesis' put forward by Sukhatme, whereby populations adapt body size to nutritional restriction and remain 'small but healthy' at lower levels of caloric intake. 28 Such purported adjustment to deprivation has been used to justify reducing the caloric needs of the reference Indian man, but more interestingly, has been specifically linked to the smaller body size of Indian women and used to justify reduced calorie needs for women and families. Allen cites these arguments to justify the benchmark of 1,941 kcals as subsistence for an adult male and 5,823 (3 X 1,941) kcals/day for a family of four persons.

It is, of course, true that eighteenth-century men and women were shorter and lighter than their modern counterparts and smaller bodies generally require fewer calories for physiological maintenance. However, this still leaves two points. First, these people had smaller bodies as adults because of their low nutritional status as

- 23 Allen, British industrial revolution , p. 38.
- 24 Allen, 'Great divergence', p. 425.
- 25 Ibid., p. 426. I remind readers here that the Ealing gardener had four children.
- 26 Assuming that the husband and father's share of resources is ring-fenced, to reach the same subsistence level, the women and children in Allen's families would need in absolute terms 3,882 kcals per day. Intra-household resource allocation is discussed further below.
- 27 FAO, Human energy requirements , tab. 5.4.

28 Allen, 'Great divergence', p. 426. The 'adaptation hypothesis' combines several different ideas and time frames, but all use the hypothetical adaptation of the efficiency of energy utilization to a lower nutritional intake to challenge any ideal standard of adequate nutrition and replace it with a (lower) critical limit below which adaptation falters and there is evidence of erosion of functional capacity; see Payne, 'Assessing'. Adaptationists also see children's growth as an instrument of control in the homeostatic process, which moulds the 'ultimate size and shape of the adult' to his/her environment, see Seckler, ' 'Malnutrition' ', p. 145, and idem, 'Small but healthy'.

children; they were stunted because of childhood underfeeding. Second, even if body sizes were smaller, that in itself does not mean that calorie supply was adequate for the maintenance of those smaller bodies.

These historical anxieties echo the response from nutritionists working in development studies. Experts have censured the 'adaptation hypothesis'. 29 For Gopalan, president of the Nutrition Foundation of India, it involves acquiescence in 'the status quo in poverty, ill-health, under nutrition and socio-economic deprivation'. 30 The way in which the adaptation hypothesis lowers benchmark consumption levels for women has come in for particular censure, being suspected of reinforcing unfair distribution within households and adding to female disadvantage. 31 Gopalan himself suggests a benchmark of 7,940 kcal/day for a notional family of one man and one woman each doing moderate work, a child aged 4-6, and another one aged 1-3. 32 Table 1 below presents the caloric requirements based on Sukhatme and Gopalan's estimates as cited by Allen, and compares them with some alternative recent FAO figures from 2004. 33 Concern here is less with absolute levels than with the estimated relative needs of man versus wife and children. The independent estimates of the nutritional needs of women and children can be compared with those for men and used to evaluate the claim that families could survive, indeed be comfortable, on three times the man's subsistence.

Allen's citation of Sukhatme does not break down the family requirements by age and gender but as his total of 5,558 kcals is less than three times the man's subsistence, the implication is that a wage which was sufficient to purchase 3 X 1,891 calories could sustain the man and all members of his family, at the same level of nutritional adequacy. Allen cites separate estimates for men, women, and children which he ascribes to Gopalan. According to these figures, a wife and two small children require 4,940 kcals/day, 2000 for the woman and 1,720 and 1,220 for the two children, and a man 2,800, which makes the family's needs 7,740 kcals/

29 Sukhatme and his colleagues' original formulation of adaptation rested heavily on observation of interpersonal and intra-personal variation in intake, which he read as suggesting variation in the efficiency of energy utilization. Such variation, he argued, undermined 'fixed requirements' models, which required replacement by a focus on the lower limit of adaptation. This minimum, he identified from stochastic variation as two standard deviations below average energy requirements, a statistical cut-off which underpinned his caloric standard; see Sukhatme, 'Measurement'; idem, ed., Newer concepts ; and for an updated account, Srinivasan, 'Undernutrition'. Both the methodology and the associated (lower) nutritional requirement came under immediate attack; see the series of related papers in Economic and Political W eekly , especially Dandekar, 'On measurement'; and Mehta, 'Nutritional norms'. Osmani, following Sen, developed the probabilistic critique.While an individual might cope with a temporary shortfall, the same argument is difficult to apply when the average intake of a large number of people falls below average requirements. It is unlikely that all members of the group will simultaneously be on the wrong side of the norm in the course of homeostatic variation. 'Some members of the group are likely to have shortfalls that are not homeostatic in nature; such people would be genuinely undernourished'; see Osmani, 'On some controversies', pp. 8 (quotation), 121-64; see also Dasgupta, Inquiry , pp. 437-41. Experts have concluded that independent scientific evidence on 'pure' adaptation in efficiency unaccompanied by any change in body weight is needed to identify the limits of adaptation. No such evidence and no supporting physiological mechanisms have been identified; see Osmani, 'On some controversies', p. 159. Drawing on a huge range of scientific literature, including the magisterial work of Waterlow (for example, 'Mechanisms'), Dasgupta, Inquiry , p. 441, concludes, 'There is more than a little irony in the fact that this thesis, which has had much influence among social scientists, is not based on any physiological evidence'. Thus, Sukhatme's estimate of lower limit nutritional adequacy (1,891 kcals/day) has neither logical nor scientific foundation and should be discarded.

- 30 Gopalan, as cited in Osmani, 'On some controversies', p. 160.
- 31 Dasgupta and Raj, 'Adapting'; Osmani, 'On some controversies'; Sridhar, Battle , pp. 56-80.
- 32 Gopalan, 'Undernutrition', p. 28.
- 33 Allen, 'Great divergence', p. 426; FAO, Human energy requirements , pp. 29, 30, 42, 45, 59.

## JANE HUMPHRIES

Table 1. Daily caloric requirements of families of different sizes and structures

| FAO, Human energy                         | requirements                            | 2,650-2,950 2,250-2,500   | 1,762                                         | 1,412 1,037                   | 9,111-9,661         | 7,950-8,850                         | (1,161)-(811)     |
|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------|
| FAO, Human FAO, Human energy requirements | 2,650-2,950                             | 2,650-2,950               | 2,925-3,175                                   | 1,412 1,037                   | 8,024-8,574         | 7,950-8,850                         | (74)-276          |
| FAO, Human                                | energy requirements energy requirements | 2,650-2,950 2,250-2,500   | 2,532-2,782                                   | 1,412 1,412 1,037 1,037       | 7,349-7,899         | 7,631-8,181 7,950-8,850 7,950-8,850 | 319-669           |
| cited in Allen, 'Great divergence',       | p. 426                                  | 2,800 2,000               |                                               | 1,720 1,220                   |                     |                                     | 601-951           |
| in Allen, 'Great divergence', p. 426      |                                         | 1,891                     |                                               |                               | 5,558 a 5,673       | 7,740 b 8,400 660                   | 115               |
|                                           |                                         | Man Woman                 | Pregnant woman Lactating woman Child aged 7-9 | Child aged 4-6 Child aged 1-3 | Family requirements | Man ¥ 3                             | Surplus/(deficit) |

Notes: a Assumes a wife and two children. b Gopalan's figures are cited incorrectly as noted above, though Allen's total for the whole family of 7,940 kcals is consistent with the original data though not his representation of it. Sources: See text.

day.While this is appreciably more calories than Allen's model offers men, women, or their children, the total remains within three times the man's subsistence (8,400 kcals/day). In fact, Gopalan's figures are cited incorrectly as he identifies 2,200 kcals as the recommended daily dietary intake for a woman doing moderate work. However, even using the correct estimate for a woman's needs from Gopalan, the total family requirement remains below three times the man's subsistence. 34

Columns 3-5 provide estimates based on the latest FAO computations taken from tables, which detail requirements by height, weight, and activity level (energy use). For a male population aged 30-59.9, with a mean height of 1.70 metres and a mean physical activity level (PAL) of 1.75, the recommended mean energy intake is about 2,750 kcal/day to maintain an optimum population body mass index (BMI) of 21, with an individual range of 2,650-2,950. While the height standard overestimates the stature of the late eighteenth-century working-class population, a PAL of 1.75 relates to 'light activity' and undoubtedly underestimates the demands of manual labour. The working assumption here is a range of 2,650-2,950 kcals/day, which brackets Gopalan's estimate. 35 For a female population aged 30-59.9, with a mean height of 1.70 metres and a mean PAL of 1.75, the recommended mean energy intake is about 2,350 kcal/day to maintain an optimum population BMI of 21, with an individual range of 2,250-2,500. 36 Again, the height assumption probably overestimates historic heights but the PAL underestimates activity levels. Note that the FAO minimum requirement for women is well above Gopalan's estimate. The calorie estimates for children are taken from tables relating to energy needs at different ages and levels of habitual physical activity. The children are assumed to be male, which raises energy needs, but to engage only in moderate activity, which reduces them. 37 Note that the FAO standards for children are much less generous than those of Gopalan, and mean that the family's total calorie budget stays within three times the male requirement.

However, in column 4, disaster threatens. The wife/mother falls pregnant (with no option to reduce her activity level). This raises her daily caloric needs by 85 in the first trimester, 285 in the second trimester, and 475 in the third trimester, averaging out to about 282 extra kcals/day over the course of the pregnancy. 38 The family's needs press against resources. Once the baby is born, assuming the wife breastfeeds, she would need 675 extra kcals/day for the first six months, and, even if she supplemented her milk with other infant food, 460 subsequently, 39 and a calorie deficit emerges. If this infant survives and the children grow up in lockstep, within a year the family is in grave difficulties (column 6). If the husband's earnings can only afford three times his requirement, the family faces a severe shortfall, for now the woman and children's caloric needs are considerably in

- 34 Gopalan, 'Undernutrition', tab. 2.1.
- 35 FAO, Human energy requirements , tab. 5.5, p. 42.
- 36 Ibid., tab. 5.8, p. 45.
- 37 Ibid., tab. 4.5, p. 29.
- 38 Ibid., p. 59.

39 It could be argued that lactating mothers will have lower PAL requirements than non-pregnant, non-lactating women because frequent breastfeeding involves periods of maternal inactivity. On the other hand, lactating women often carry their infants while moving around, and this additional workload might balance any reduced physical activity associated with feeding itself; see ibid., p. 65.

## JANE HUMPHRIES

Table 2. The caloric requirements of nineteenth-century men and women

|               | Year of measurement (age, year of birth)   | Height   | BMI     | Light work   | Moderate work   | Heavy work   |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------|----------|---------|--------------|-----------------|--------------|
| Man           | 1800.5 (23)                                | 168.83   | 20.73   | 2,436        | 2,816           | 3,377        |
|               | 1850 (23)                                  | 172.87   | 20.73   | 2,503        | 2,894           | 3,470        |
| Woman (rural) | 1817-40 (23, n.a.)                         | 156.6    | n.a.    | 2,200 b      | 2,550 b         | 2,750 b      |
| Woman (urban) | 1817-40 (23, n.a.)                         | 154.3    | n.a.    | 2,200 b      | 2,550 b         | 2,750 b      |
| Woman         | 1866-78 (23, 1800-09)                      | 152.0 a  | 24.09 a | 2,250        | 2,650           | 2,850        |

Notes: a Estimated from regressions in Horrell et al., 'Measuring misery', pp. 106-7.

b Assuming a BMI of 21 and light work = PAL of 1.75, moderate work = PAL of 2.05, and heavy work = PAL of 2.20.

Sources: Floud et al., Changing body ; p. 169; Nicholas and Oxley, 'Living standards', p. 733; Horrell et al., 'Measuring misery', pp. 106-7.

excess of double the man's subsistence consumption. Allen's parsimonious benchmark figure of 5,823 kcals/day falls well short of these requirements, even if family size froze at three children.

To forestall the obvious rejoinder that modern nutritional requirements are just as inappropriate as the adaptationists' discredited standards, we turn to a recent authoritative survey of nutrition and human development, which combines the FAO standards with information about the heights and weights of British men in the nineteenth century to estimate the calorific needs of historically representative individuals. 40 The results for a 23-year-old man for two different cohorts and three possible work regimes are shown in table 2. Heights and weights from historical samples enable analogous estimates for women. 41 These are not far below men's, and consideration of pregnancy and lactation, which were almost continuous in these times of high fertility, would further compress the gender gap.

A comparison of these estimates with the mainly Indian figures cited by Allen reveals the latter's gender bias.While the needs of Gopalan's 'Indian man' are close to those estimated for a nineteenth-century British agricultural labourer doing moderate work, the estimates for an 'Indian woman' are seriously below the reconstructed requirement for the labourer's wife. Other sources suggest that it is not the estimate of women's needs presented in this article that is excessive. For example, Dasgupta cites a World Health Organization computation of the energy requirements of a '35-year-old rural woman in a developing country', whose height (1.6 metres), BMI (19.5), and routine (three hours of housework, four hours of fieldwork, and two hours of discretionary activity per day) are similar to a nineteenth-century counterpart, perhaps on a light-work regime. 42 The 2,235 kcals/day needed to maintain this woman's (relatively low) BMI is close to the estimate presented here of the needs of her long-dead British sister while 12 per cent above Gopalan's figure for an 'Indian woman'. The uncritical use of flawed Third World nutrition studies to estimate the needs of historical women spreads gender bias to the past.

To drive these points home, table 3 shows the calorie requirements, according to FAO standards, of a now familiar family, that of the Ealing gardener. 43

Table 3. The caloric requirements of the family of the Ealing gardener

|                     | FAO, 2004 Ealing gardener   |
|---------------------|-----------------------------|
| Man                 | 2,650-2,950                 |
| Woman               | 2,250-2,500                 |
| Boy aged 8          | 1,762                       |
| Boy aged 6          | 1,525                       |
| Girl aged 4         | 1,200                       |
| Girl aged 1 1 /2    | 850                         |
| Family requirements | 10,237-10,787               |
| Man ¥ 3             | 7,950-8,850                 |
| Surplus/(deficit)   | (2,287)-(1,937)             |

Source: See text.

While these absolute caloric levels might be disputed, the extent to which the calorie needs of this (real) family exceed those of the husband/father multiplied by three is so large that even major adjustments could not bridge the calorie gap.The relative needs of the woman and children are too great. Once attention is on historically realistic individuals living in households of representative sizes and structures, the assumption that women and their children could be maintained at the male standard on double the cost of a man's consumption bundle appears to be hopelessly wide of the mark.

These figures imply that at the start of the nineteenth century a significant proportion of family members may not have had access to sufficient calories to undertake sustained arduous work, participate in discretionary activities, or maintain a healthy BMI. 44 Guaranteeing the share of male breadwinners, may have been a rational response, enabling the husband and father to remain in work and so contribute to the well-being of the family as a whole. However, this meant that any shortfall imposed exclusively on the share of women and children and so contributed to their undernutrition with adverse effects on the health of the next generation. 45

## IV

The faulty foundations of the high wage economy are not limited to the problematic conversion of women and children into adult equivalents for the purposes of assessing nutritional requirements. They are also flawed in their implicit perception of family size and structure. In fact, the Ealing gardener was fortunate in having, by the standards of the time, a small family. Others were not so fortunate. One source of the pressures on Bill H\_\_\_\_'s embattled family was its 'wonderful large size'! 46 Such large families were common, indeed more common than the smallish one supported by the Ealing gardener. Table 4 reproduces some rare evidence on children born into early-nineteenth-century families based on the retrospective fertility questions from the 1911 census. The evidence suggests that

704

## JANE HUMPHRIES

Table 4. Children born and children surviving, by occupational group

|                            | Agricultural labourers   | Agricultural labourers   | Miners        | Miners             | Textile workers   | Textile workers    |
|----------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|---------------|--------------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| Approximate marriage dates | Children born            | Children surviving       | Children born | Children surviving | Children born     | Children surviving |
| - 1861                     | 7.94                     | 5.68                     | 8.23          | 5.00               | 7.36              | 4.73               |
| 1861-71                    | 7.28                     | 5.55                     | 8.27          | 5.50               | 6.71              | 4.51               |
| 1871-81                    | 6.70                     | 5.36                     | 7.76          | 5.44               | 5.84              | 4.18               |

Source: Stevenson, 'Fertility', pp. 414-15.

Table 5. Marital fertility and average size of sibling group

| Years     |   Completed family size, Xm |   Variance of Xm, s 2 Xm |   Computed average size of sibling group, C = Xm + s 2 Xm Xm / |
|-----------|-----------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1700-1750 |                       4.701 |                  10.0175 |                                                          6.832 |
| 1750-1800 |                       5.463 |                  11.012  |                                                          7.479 |
| 1800-1837 |                       5.536 |                  11.2599 |                                                          7.57  |

Source: Completed family size calculated from the data that generated tab. 7.17, p. 403, inWrigley et al., English population history , and kindly provided by J. E. Oeppen, along with the estimates of s 2 Xm needed to compute the average size of sibling group.

in the mid-nineteenth century, it was common for seven or eight children to be born into working-class families with some variation between occupational groups. Earlier in the century, when marriage age was lower, even more children would have been born.

George Holyoake's experience was common; he recalled his mother 'had many children; she reared eleven'. 47 George Lansbury understood the reasons for such large families: his parents married young and 'their family increased and multiplied at a rapid rate.There was no talk of birth control clinics when I was born, so my mother's family of nine came into the world at quite regular intervals of between eighteen or twenty months'. 48 Before these individual remembrances are dismissed as outlandish outliers, other mainstream evidence should be considered. Table 5 shows completed family size for women surviving to age 50, computed from the family reconstitution that underpinned Wrigley et al.'s classic demographic history. 49 It suggests that on average women might bear five or six surviving children. Moreover, for families with children, the size of the sibset was bigger still. The average number of children ever born by a group of women differs from the average sibling group of children of those women. Women contribute equally to the former while women with large families contribute disproportionately to the latter. For example, if half of a group of women have four children and half have none, the average family size for a woman would be two but for a child it would be twice as large, that is four. Demographers have demonstrated the simple and exact relation that exists between average number of children ever born to a cohort of women and the average sibset of children of those women. 50 The 'Preston correc-

tion' is defined in the heading of column 4, table 5, and applied to the fertility data to compute sibling group sizes for the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. As can be seen, averages based on the best demographic data available demonstrate that sibsets typically consisted of seven or eight children.

The averages shown in table 5 are based on data for the population as a whole. For working-class families and especially those headed by men in occupational groups with high fertility, such as agricultural labourers, numbers of children would have been higher still. Bill H\_\_\_\_'s family size starts to look commonplace.

Of course, to counterpoise large families, there were others that had no or few children either because of their stage in the family life cycle or because of infertility. Such families, if their male heads earned at the level of London artisans, were comfortably off. Single men and young couples, for example, could enjoy a high standard of living; but for the latter at least, once babies began to arrive, resources became stretched. At the end of the family life cycle too, households might be relatively unburdened, but it was a rare working person who either maintained his/her earnings capacity or saved enough for a comfortable old age. Children were not distributed equally across working-class households; indeed this was an important source of intra-class inequality. However, most families in these high fertility times experienced years of burdensome dependency and, even as a cross-section average, the high wage economy assumption of two children appears an underestimate.

Recognizing the need for more realistic assumptions about family size, in a recent related article on the standard of living of agricultural labourers' families, Allen, writing with Weisdorf, acknowledged that for this group of workers a family poverty line computed from tripling the costs of a man's subsistence basket was probably insufficient. 51 To capture increasing pressures from family size on living standards, Allen andWeisdorf offer a flat rate multiple that shifts from 3 to 3.25 or variable multiples based on the dependency ratio or 2 + the net reproduction rate (NRR). 52 The variable multiples do suggest demographic pressures on the living standards of agricultural labourers in the period, strains that the authors believe might have led to an increased labour supply from the women and children in labourers' families. In such families increased industriousness was a defensive response to pressure on subsistence standards rather than an active strategy to secure more disposable income.While these findings and their interpretation move in the right direction, the strategies to compute intra-family dependency remain inadequate. The former continues to distribute children (and the elderly) equally across families, while the latter fails to recognize another unpleasant demographic fact of the times: many more children were born and partially raised than survived to figure in the NRR. Referring back to table 4, Stevenson's recompilation of the unique data from the 1911 census compares children born with children surviving to show that on average around two children per family perished before adulthood. 53 Families suffered non-trivial economic as well as emotional costs because of investing in babies, infants, children, and adolescents who died before adulthood. Death rates in infancy and childhood did decline in the eighteenth century but slowly and inconsistently, and while deaths in the first months of life fell this

- 52 The dependency ratio is taken from Wrigley and Schofield, Population history , p. 443.

just meant that there were more confinements and more babies surviving to die in later childhood. 54 Moreover, there is good evidence to suggest that infant and childhood mortality deteriorated in the first half of the nineteenth century, meaning that families faced the costs of bearing and at least partially raising children only to have them die before adulthood with greater frequency. 55 By these times, with luck, families lost two such children but many lost more. As Bill H\_\_\_\_ laconically put it, his large sibset 'died down' to the more manageable size of six. 56

Moreover, the misjudgement of the families of the past does not stop at the attenuation of family size and so misjudgement of the adequacy of men's earnings to support dependants. It extends to the ahistorical assumption that all families had a male head on whom to depend. Even a cursory inspection of Allen's chosen contemporary commentary, Eden's State of the poor , would have revealed overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Eden's survey covers a number of households headed by widows, a number headed by absent soldiers and sailors (remember this was the height of the French wars), and several wives whose husbands had simply 'run away'. Households of this kind occur with great regularity in surveys of working-class conditions and listings of households by type are frequent on lists of outdoor relief and charitable subsidies, and evident in workhouse populations. While the prevalence of female-headed households and women struggling to raise their children alone is etched into the historical record, it is not the only sign that not all families matched up to the template assumed in the high wage economy model. There were other kinds of incomplete, broken, or disintegrating families. Mothers too died or (very rarely) abandoned their families, leaving fathers to soldier on alone. Both lone mothers and ( a fortiori ) lone fathers tried to patch up crumbling families through remarriage, though this often raised the burden of dependency. For some unlucky children both parents died or disappeared leaving them to the care of other kin, the poor law, or charities. There were even households headed by children who sought to look after siblings, and there were children who fell through all the safety nets of kin, parish, and charitable trusts to live on the streets and under the hedges of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Britain.

It is possible, although not easy, to estimate the frequency with which children grew up without parental support. The numbers turn out to be non-trivial. The evidence is piecemeal but on the basis of listings of households by size and structure for a number of early modern communities, Laslett calculated that 20.7 per cent of children resident in families had lost either their father or their mother, with many more apparently fatherless than motherless. 57 Based on data for Bristol in 1694, which added a large urban community to the predominantly rural parishes that Laslett had investigated, Holman found that 24 per cent of resident children lived in single-parent households, with again many more dependent on lone mothers than on lone fathers. 58 Trends in the cross-sectional averages suggested that orphanage increased over time. These sources record not the proportion of children orphaned but those living in lone-parent families. Many families did not survive the death of a parent but were broken up and the children

- 54 Wrigley, Energy , p. 152.
- 55 Wrigley et al., English population history , pp. 256-61.
- 56 H\_\_\_\_, 'Autobiography of a navvy', p. 140.
- 57 Laslett, 'Parental deprivation', p. 13; see also Anderson, 'Social implications'.
- 58 Holman, 'Orphans', p. 41.

scattered. Moreover, the doubly unfortunate children who lost both parents were usually absorbed into other households or institutionalized, and cannot be identified in listings or household surveys. Moreover, orphanage at any one point in time underestimates the proportion of children bereft of one or other parent during childhood, which Laslett projected from the cross-sections at about onethird of resident children. Another study, based on the unusually detailed death registers for Shifnal in Shropshire in the first quarter of the eighteenth century, also offers a longitudinal perspective and suggests that 40 per cent of children who survived to age 16 had lost a parent, with marked differences by social class. 59

Evidence that is even more valuable is available in the form of simulations of orphanage using CAMSIM and based on demographic parameters from Wrigley et al. 60 The results of simulating 10k male egos and their biological parents and step-parents suggested that for 1750-99 between 14 and 19 per cent of children lost their mother before their fourteenth birthday, between 16 and 18 per cent lost their father, and between 27 and 33 per cent lost either their mother or their father. Improvements in adult mortality meant that for the period 1800-37 the proportions were 11-16 per cent, 14-15 per cent, and 23-8 per cent. 61

Intriguingly, my estimate of orphanage based on a sample of working-men's autobiographies tracks population demographics, but with one striking difference: the autobiographical evidence recorded expected levels of maternal mortality but a surprisingly high death rate for fathers. 62 This is no statistical aberration but reveals an important characteristic of the families of the time: many were without a yet-living husband/father. The autobiographers sometimes made it hard to distinguish deceased fathers from those who had become detached from their families or never married their mothers. This distinction is almost impossible if writers deliberately covered up desertion or bastardy with a white lie about paternal demise. Indeed several autobiographers were exposed in such subterfuge. 63 Thus, the excess paternal mortality recorded in the autobiographies probably in part reflects an element of de facto fatherlessness. Moreover, to the suspiciously inflated total of dead fathers must be added the non-trivial number openly, if painfully, reported as absent though not presumed dead. A sad fact revealed by the autobiographies, and supported by other historical sources, was that not all fathers were reliable. Men abandoned women and children before marriage, suitor desertion driving up the illegitimacy rate. 64 They volunteered to serve in the forces, or were recruited or press-ganged. They emigrated, promising (probably in good faith) to send for families, but became disconnected.They were imprisoned, transported, even executed for crimes they did or did not commit. Even if fathers remained with their families, they were not all competent breadwinners. Some were hopelessly alcoholic. Others became ill or incapacitated.Yet others went off looking for work or higher wages and somehow lost touch with the women and children left behind. According to my estimates, depending on what

- 59 Watts, 'Demographic facts', p. 43.
- 60 Smith and Oeppen,'Estimating numbers';Wrigley et al., English population history . See also Anderson, 'Social implications', which provides an as if simulation by deducing levels of orphanage from the passage of a virtual cohort through the relevant life table on p. 49.
- 61 For more detail on these figures, see Humphries, Childhood , p. 65.
- 62 Humphries, Childhood , pp. 49-83.
- 63 See ibid., p. 66.
- 64 Seccombe, Weathering , pp. 50-1.

proportion of the excess paternal mortality recorded in the autobiographies is taken as indicating alienation and abandonment, somewhere between 8 and 18 per cent of boys grew up separated from yet-living fathers. 65

This finding is consistent with other historians' depictions of the eighteenth century as a period of considerable marital instability, in turn associated with economic, social, and political conditions. 66 The large and again growing numbers of women and children among pauper populations, noted by all poor law historians, were in part at least the bitter consequence of family breakdown and male abandonment. 67 While rates of separation and desertion are very difficult to pin down, some historians have suggested rough orders of magnitude. Based on the demographic reconstitution of Colyton, Sharpe concluded that 10 per cent of all marriages pledged between 1725 and 1756 ended in separation. 68 Using settlement examinations, Snell held that the rate of family break-up in rural England was relatively stable over nearly two centuries at around 5-6 per cent, 69 while Kent argued for a rate roughly three times larger and much more volatile for his large Londonconstituency. 70 Bailey's recent multi-sourced study of matrimonial conflict, while unable to quantify rates of family breakdown, nonetheless strongly suggests that desertions increased from the seventeenth century, consistent with contemporary perceptions that runaway husbands were becoming more common. 71

Male-breadwinner households' grip on the high wage economy was only as reliable as the men who headed them and these men's ability and commitment to provide support could prove frail indeed. 72 The presence of a significant group of families whose fathers, while yet-living, were not present, alongside the perhaps 18 per cent whose fathers had died, testifies to the turbulence of the times, with war, empire building, and labour mobility straining men's links to wives and children. It warns against assuming that all families had access to a man's wage let alone one able to purchase three times the male subsistence.

V

This alternative account of the needs, structure, and functioning of the workingclass family challenges the high wage economy paradigm. It has reminded readers that the life cycle of the standard family meant at least one stage when the man's earnings, even if delivered up in full and sufficient to buy three times his own subsistence, could not cover the caloric needs of dependent women and children. For many families, long tails of dependent children or the father's incapacity prolonged this stage. The implications are stark. One response has already been suggested: the ring-fencing of the father's share of household resources to ensure his capacity to work, albeit at the expense of other family members. Much direct

- 65 Humphries, Childhood , pp. 63-76, 80-3.
- 66 Emmison, 'Relief of the poor'; Stone, Family ; Outhwaite, 'Introduction'; Snell, Annals ; Kent, ' 'Gone for a soldier' '; Sharpe, 'Literally spinsters'; idem, 'Marital separation'; Humphries, 'Female-headed households'; Bailey, Unquiet lives .
- 67 Lees, Solidarities , pp. 56-8, 192, 196; Snell, Parish , pp. 306-10.
- 68 Sharpe, 'Marital separation'.
- 69 Snell, Annals , p. 361.
- 70 Kent, ' 'Gone for a soldier' ', p. 30.
- 71 Bailey, Unquiet lives , pp. 160-78.
- 72 For further discussion of 'breadwinner frailty', see Humphries, Childhood , pp. 172, 367-8.

and indirect evidence suggests that this response was widespread, with important knock-on implications for the health and well-being of women and children and thereby of future generations. However, there was another common option: the employment of women and children. Remember that the inability of the boys in Bill H\_\_\_\_'s family to find work and so assist their father in his breadwinning exacerbated their poverty. Such 'added worker' strategies underpinned the 'industriousness' among the families of agricultural labourers to which Allen and Weisdorf allude. 73 For those many families that had no male head, let alone a competent breadwinner, there was no option.The availability of needy and pliable women and children, and the public interest in putting them to work rather than supporting them on the rates, provided another motive for invention and innovation, as classic accounts of the industrial revolution emphasized. 74 Mechanization promised savings by not only replacing expensive male labour with capital but also by replacing it with cheap female and child labour. Which motive was uppermost?

The motivation of inventors and the effects of their inventions are not transparent. MacLeod's pioneering investigation of patent records revealed the 'stresses and opportunities' incentivizing inventors. 75 These were surprising, and are even more so in view of the ascendancy of the high wage economy paradigm. Early eighteenth-century inventors rarely claimed that their innovations saved labour, inventors probably judging it unwise to publicize any adverse effects on local employment. 76 Interestingly, they were more likely to promise employment creation, particularly of jobs for women and children, who by implication would otherwise be a burden on the rates. Over time it became more acceptable to claim that an invention replaced labour, and by the 1790s patentees had lost all inhibition, with inventors in textiles, metal and leather trades, agriculture, ropemaking, docking, and brewing all claiming such an advantage. Even then, savings were not of all labour but mainly the labour of skilled adults. Inventions were often advertised as reducing the need for strength or skill and so facilitating the substitution of unskilled women and children for adult trained operatives. The calculations by John Wyatt in defence of his (and Lewis Paul's) spinning engine are instructive, not least for the alertness shown to the interest of the poor law authorities in creating work for women and children.Wyatt claimed that a clothier who employed 100 workers might turn off 30 'of the best of them' but take in 10 children or disabled persons and thereby be 35 per cent richer, while the parish would save £5 in forgone poor relief. 77 Since such substitution was at the heart of worker resistance to new technology, it required a certain boldness to make such claims, and probably suggests that more inventions than announced were directed to this end. 78 Further scrutiny of the patent record and contemporary accounts of

- 73 Allen and Weisdorf, 'Was there an 'industrious revolution'?'.
- 74 Deane, First industrial revolution ; see also Berg, Age of manufactures .
- 75 MacLeod, Inventing , p. 158.
- 76 Of the patents which specified a motivation, only 4.2% aimed to save labour; MacLeod, Inventing , p. 159; see also Mokyr, Lever of riches , p. 165.
- 77 And 'the Kingdom' would gain 'thirty able people' (assuming they could be redeployed of course); quoted in MacLeod, Inventing , p. 164.

innovation reveal another motive: the search for greater control over the labour process, the quality of products, and the regularity and intensity of work. 79 This too went hand in hand with increasing the employment of women and children. Manufacturers and inventors saw the technical and economic advantages in using a new workforce in such a way as to bypass artisan practices and controls and so sap resistance to change. 80 Although high wages, and even absolute labour shortages with men away at war, meant economic 'stresses' that nudged invention towards saving labour, at the same time the supply of cheap and (relatively) docile female and child labour provided 'opportunities' which also incentivized inventors and manufacturers; as the pioneering historian of mechanization has put it: 'machines and processes were invented with this female and child labour force in mind'. 81

It is not surprising that inventors should be alive to the opportunities implicit in female and child labour, for many of them were rooted not in the coalfields or metallurgical industries but in the rural proto-industrialization that had soaked up under-employed family labour. In these industries, where innovation was often in the nature of the products as much as the equipment, the availability of female and child labour moulded the evolution of technology and there are many examples of machinery specifically designed to be worked by women or by one adult with child or family assistants. 82

Moreover, while important, mechanization was just one element in the changes in the organization of work, which characterized the first industrial revolution. Eighteenth-century economic growth rested on a growing division of labour, the rise of workshop production, and the eventual emergence of the factory system. These changes facilitated mechanization but were themselves facilitated by the availability of female and child labour in rural and provincial areas of Britain. 83 Britain's eventual competitive advantage over India in the production of cotton yarn did not rest on the jenny but had to await further nineteenth-century improvements and, in particular, the development of the factory system, and the key to the successful operation of the early mills was the employment of women and children. 84 The unsavoury Richard Arkwright is often airbrushed out of group portraits of great inventors but he did pioneer the application of water power to the jenny and so the factory phase of textile production. When he made this crucial innovation, he located his mill at Cromford in Derbyshire explicitly to exploit the labour of the children of local lead miners, whom he expected to be able to employ, as the mines were on the verge

of exhaustion and the families impoverished. 85 In fact, Arkwright's machinations miscarried. The miners resisted sending their children to work at his mill, forcing Arkwright to recruit labour elsewhere; but the factory master's target remained women and children, and when the mill opened he employed 200, the youngest of whom was seven.

Thus, the early industrial economy combined two labour markets, each linked into a specific family structure. The first did business in skilled adult males in prime locations whose costliness, while enabling the support of a wife and children, simultaneously encouraged the substitution emphasized in the new conventional wisdom. The second traded in the labour of unskilled (and sometimes broken-down) men, and those needy women and children who lacked the support of a male breadwinner.The availability of this second type of labour also prompted invention, innovation, and (perhaps more importantly) work reorganization, and in this way it too contributed to the industrial revolution.

There are loose ends.Whether this second spur to industrialization represents an alternative to Allen's high wage economy or merely an addition with which it is consistent deserves further attention. Moreover, whether alternative or additional, this theory lacks the powerful comparative muscle that Allen's flexes so vigorously. Sceptical readers will need to be convinced that British working families were burdened with more children and experienced more 'breadwinner frailty' than their European counterparts, and that as a result British women and children were more likely to need to work for wages.These issues need more space and time than is available here. Nevertheless, it is possible to start by noting that British households were precociously nuclear, a feature probably linked to the early development of wage labour, shifted to a much lower age at marriage and higher fertility in the course of the eighteenth century, and in the crucible of industrialization experienced levels of fertility that left most of their European counterparts behind. 86 Perhaps British families were just as 'exceptional' as were British male wage levels. 87

As a child, Bill H\_\_\_\_ was excluded from Allen's high wage economy because of his father's irregular and low paid employment and his mother's fecundity. As an adult, he remained an outsider because he lacked skills and was inclined to hard living. Bill's restless lifestyle got him into trouble and he even spent time in gaol, where, in fact, he obtained 'most of [his] scholarship'. 88 Although he never confessed to fathering any children, his several amorous encounters and peripatetic lifestyle suggest that he might well have been one of the many 'deadbeat dads' who

86 For example, it is widely known that France (taken as the UK's leading competitor) retained more small-scale property ownership associated with much less wage dependence and in particular much less dependence on men and male wages. Women and children could be employed on family farms and within family businesses. French visitors to the UK were horrified to see children seeking employment as wage labourers. In addition, of course, French fertility remained much lower than British fertility and so the burden of dependency was much less.Thus not only were adult (skilled) men likely to earn more but the dual labour market structure sketched in the conclusion to this article was also likely part of 'British exceptionalism'.

went missing in these turbulent times. Bill started work early and laboured hard for most of his life, digging the canals and driving the railways that linked workshops, factories, markets, and ports, but he never earned high wages. His career and his family life hardly exemplify the high wage economy but they do capture the experience of many individuals who in a different way contributed to this great historical divide.

Date submitted

8 July 2011

Revised version submitted

21 March 2012

Accepted

27 March 2012

## DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-0289.2012.00663.x

## Footnote references

- Allen, R. C., 'The great divergence in European wages and prices from the middle ages to the First World War', Explorations in Economic History , 38 (2001), pp. 411-47.
- Allen, R. C., 'Poverty and progress in early modern Europe', Economic History Review , LVI (2003), pp. 403-43. Allen, R. C., The British industrial revolution in global perspective (Cambridge, 2009).
- Allen, R. C., 'Engels' pause: technical change, capital accumulation, and inequality in the British industrial revolution', Explorations in Economic History , 46 (2009), pp. 418-35.
- Allen, R. C., Global economic history: a very short introduction (Oxford, 2011).
- Allen, R. C., 'Why the industrial revolution was British: commerce, induced invention, and the scientific revolution', Economic History Review , 64 (2011), pp. 357-84.
- Allen, R. C. and Weisdorf, J., 'Was there an 'industrious revolution' before the industrial revolution? An empirical exercise for England, c. 1300-1830', Economic History Review , 64 (2011), pp. 715-29.
- Anderson, M., 'The social implications of demographic change', in F. M. L. Thompson, ed., The Cambridge social history of Britain 1750-1950 , II: People and their environment (Cambridge, 1990), pp. 1-70.
- Bailey, J., Unquiet lives: marriage and marriage breakdown in England, 1660-1800 (Cambridge, 2003).
- Berg, M., 'Workers and machinery in eighteenth-century England', in J. Rule, ed., British trade unionism 1750-1850: the formative years (1988), pp. 52-73.
- Berg, M., The age of manufactures, 1700-1820. Industry, innovation and work in Britain (1994).
- Berg, M., Luxury and pleasure in eighteenth-century Britain (Oxford, 2005).
- Berg, M. and Hudson, P., 'Rehabilitating the industrial revolution', Economic History Review , XLV (1992), pp. 24-50.
- Broadberry, S. and Gupta, B., 'Lancashire, India, and shifting competitive advantage in cotton textiles, 1700-1850: the neglected role of factor prices', Economic History Review , 62 (2009), pp. 279-305.
- Brunt, L., 'The advent of the sample survey in the social sciences', Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , ser. D, 50 (2001), pp. 179-89.
- Clark, G., 'Farm wages and living standards in the industrial revolution: England, 1670-1850', Economic History Review , LIV (2001), pp. 477-505.
- Dandekar, V. M., 'On measurement of undernutrition', Economic and PoliticalW eekly , XVII (1982), pp. 203-12. Dasgupta, P., An inquiry into well-being and destitution (Oxford, 1993).
- Dasgupta, P. and Raj, D., 'Adapting to undernourishment: the biological evidence and its implications', in J. Dreze and A. Sen, eds., The political economy of hunger , I, Entitlement and well-being (Oxford, 1990), pp. 191-246.
- David, P. A., Technical choice, innovation, and economic growth: essay on American and British experience in the nineteenth century (Cambridge, 1975).

Deane, P. M., The first industrial revolution (Cambridge, 1965).

- Eden, Sir F. M., A history of the labouring classes in England, with parochial reports , A.G.L. Rogers, abridged and ed. (1928).

Emmison, F. G., 'The relief of the poor at Eaton Socon, 1706-1834', Miscellanea (Bedfordshire Historical Rec. Soc., 15, 1933), pp. 14-19.

- FAO(Food and Agriculture Organization), Human energy requirements , Food and NutritionTechnical Report ser., report of a joint FAO/WHO/UNU expert consultation, Rome, 17-24 October 2001 (Rome, 2004).

Feinstein, C. H., 'Pessimism perpetuated: real wages and the standard of living in Britain during and after the industrial revolution', Journal of Economic History , 58 (1998), pp. 625-58.

- Floud, R., Fogel, R. W ., Harris, B., and Hong, S. C., The changing body: health, nutrition, and human development in the western world since 1700 (Cambridge, 2011).
- Gopalan, C., 'Undernutrition: measurement and implications', in S. R. Osmani, ed., Nutrition and poverty (Oxford, 1992), pp. 17-47.

## CRITIQUE OF THE HIGHWAGE ECONOMY INTERPRETATION

Griffiths, T., Hunt, P. A., and O'Brien, P. K., 'Inventive activity in the British textile industry, 1700-1800', Journal of Economic History , 52 (1992), pp. 881-906.

- H\_\_\_\_, B., 'Autobiography of a navvy', Macmillans Magazine , 5 (Nov. 1861-April 1862), pp. 140-51.

Habakkuk, H. J.,

American and British technology in the nineteenth century

(Cambridge, 1962).

- Harris, B., 'Gender, health and welfare in England andWales since industrialization', Research in Economic History , 26 (2008), pp. 157-204.

Holman, J. R., 'Orphans in pre-industrial towns-the case of Bristol in the late seventeenth century', Local Population Studies , 15 (1975), pp. 40-4.

Holyoake, G. J., Sixty years of an agitator's life (1906).

Honeyman, K., Child workers in England, 1780-1820: parish apprentices and the making of the early industrial labour force (Aldershot, 2007).

- Horrell, S. and Humphries, J., 'Old questions, new data, and alternative perspectives: families' living standards in the industrial revolution', Journal of Economic History , 52 (1992), pp. 849-80.
- Horrell, S., Meredith, D., and Oxley, D., 'Measuring misery: body mass, ageing and gender inequality inVictorian London', Explorations in Economic History , 46 (2009), pp. 93-119.
- Hudson, P., 'Review of The British industrial revolution in global perspective ', Economic History Review , 63 (2010), pp. 242-5.

Humphries, J., ' 'Bread and a penny-worth of treacle': excess female mortality in England in the 1840s', Cambridge Journal of Economics , 15 (1991), pp. 451-73.

Humphries, J., 'Female-headed households in early industrial Britain: the vanguard of the proletariat?', Labour History Review , 63 (1998), pp. 31-65.

Humphries, J., Childhood and child labour in the British industrial revolution (Cambridge, 2010).

- Kent, D. A., ' 'Gone for a soldier': family breakdown and the demography of desertion in a London parish, 1750-91', Local Population Studies , 45 (1990), pp. 27-42.

King, S.,

Poverty and welfare in England, 1700-1850. A regional perspective

(Manchester, 2000).

Kirby, P., Child labour in Britain, 1750-1870 (2003).

Lansbury, G., My life (1928).

Laslett, P., 'Parental deprivation in the past: a note on the history of orphans in England', Local Population Studies , 13 (1974), pp. 11-18.

Laslett, P. and Wall, R., eds., Household and family in past time (Cambridge, 1972).

Lees, L. H., The solidarities of strangers.The English poor laws and the people, 1700-1948 (Cambridge, 1998).

Levene, A., 'Parish apprenticeship and the old poor law in London', Economic History Review , 63 (2010), pp. 915-41.

Lindert, P. H. and Williamson, J. G., 'English workers' living standards during the industrial revolution: a new look', Economic History Review , 2nd ser., XXXVI (1983), pp. 1-25.

MacLeod, C., Inventing the industrial revolution.The English patent system, 1660-1800 (Cambridge, 1988).

McNay, K., Humphries, J., and Klasen, S., 'Excess female mortality in nineteenth-century England and Wales: a regional analysis', Social Science History , 29 (2005), pp. 649-81.

Mehta, J., 'Nutritional norms and measurement of malnourishment and poverty', Economic and PoliticalW eekly , XVII (1982), pp. 1332-40.

Mokyr, J., The lever of riches: technological creativity and economic progress (Oxford, 1990).

Mokyr,

J.,

The

enlightened

economy:

Britain

and

the

industrial

revolution

1700-1850

(New

Haven,

Conn.,

2011).

Muldrew, C., Food, energy and the creation of industriousness: work and material culture in agrarian England, 1550-1780 (Cambridge, 2011).

Nicholas, S. and Oxley, D., 'The living standards of women during the industrial revolution, 1795-1820', Economic History Review , XLVI (1993), pp. 723-49.

- Osmani, S. R., 'On some controversies in the measurement of undernutrition', in S. R. Osmani, ed., Nutrition and poverty (Oxford, 1992), pp. 121-64.
- Osmani, S. R., ed., Nutrition and poverty (Oxford, 1992).

Osmani, S. R. and Sen, A., 'The hidden penalties of gender inequality: fetal origins of ill-health', Economics and Human Biology , 1 (2003), pp. 105-21.

Outhwaite, R. B., 'Introduction: problems and perspectives in the history of marriage', in R. B. Outhwaite, ed., Marriage and society: studies in the social history of marriage (1981), pp. 1-16.

Payne, P., 'Assessing undernutrition. The need for a reconceptualization', in S. R. Osmani, ed., Nutrition and poverty (Oxford, 1992), pp. 45-96.

- Preston, S. H., 'Family sizes of children and family sizes of women', Demography , 13 (1976), pp. 105-14.

Randall,

A.,

Before

the

Luddites: custom, community

and machinery

in

the

English

woollen

industry

1776-1809

(Cambridge, 1991).

Seccombe, W., Weathering the storm.W orking-class families from the industrial revolution to the fertility decline (1993). Seckler, D., ' 'Malnutrition': an intellectual odyssey', in P.V . Sukhatme, ed., Newer concepts in nutrition and their implications for policy (Pune, India, 1982), pp. 139-48.

Seckler, D., 'Small but healthy: a basic hypothesis in the theory, measurement and policy of malnutrition', in P. V . Sukhatme, ed., Newer concepts in nutrition and their implications for policy (Pune, India, 1982), pp. 127-34.

## 714

## JANE HUMPHRIES

- Sharpe, P., 'Marital separation in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries', Local Population Studies , 45 (1990), pp. 66-70.
- Sharpe, P., 'Literally spinsters: a new interpretation of local economy and demography in Colyton in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries', Economic History Review , XLIV (1991), pp. 46-65.
- Shaw-Taylor, L. and Wrigley, E. A., 'The occupational structure of England c .1750-1871: a preliminary report', http://www.hpss.geog.cam.ac.uk/research/projects/occupations/introduction/summary.pdf.

Smith, J. E. and Oeppen, J., 'Estimating numbers of kin in historical England using demographic microsimulation', in D. S. Reher and R. Schofield, eds., New methods in historical demography (Oxford, 1993), pp. 280-317. Snell, K. D. M., Annals of the labouring poor: social change and agrarian England, 1660-1900 (Cambridge, 1985). Snell, K. D. M., Parish and belonging. Community,identity and welfare in England andW ales, 1700-1950 (Cambridge, 2006).

- Sridhar, D., The battle against hunger: choice, circumstance, and theW orld Bank (Oxford, 2008).
- Srinivasan, T. N., 'Undernutrition: concepts, measurement and policy implications', in S. R. Osmani, ed., Nutrition and poverty (Oxford, 1992), pp. 97-120.
- Stevenson, T. H. C., 'The fertility of various social classes in England andWales from the middle of the nineteenth century to 1911', Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , 83 (1920), pp. 401-32.
- Stone, L., The family, sex and marriage in England, 1500-1800 (1977).
- Sukhatme, P. V., 'Measurement of undernutrition', Economic and PoliticalWeekly , 17 (1982), pp. 2000-16.
- Sukhatme, P. V., ed., Newer concepts in nutrition and their implications for policy (Pune, India, 1982).
- Sukhatme, P.V., 'Poverty and malnutrition', in P.V. Sukhatme, ed., Newer concepts in nutrition and their implications for policy (Pune, India, 1982), pp. 11-64.
- Taylor, G., The problem of poverty, 1660-1834 (1969).
- Vincent, D., Bread, knowledge and freedom: a study of nineteenth-century working class autobiography (1981).
- Waterlow, J. C., 'Mechanisms of adaptation to low energy intakes', in G. A. Harrison and J. C. Waterlow, eds., Diet and disease in traditional and developing countries (Cambridge, 1990), pp. 5-23.
- Watts, S., 'Demographic facts as experienced by a group of families in eighteenth-century Shifnal, Shropshire', Local Population Studies , 32 (1984), pp. 34-43.
- Weir, D. R., 'Life under pressure: France and England, 1670-1870', Journal of Economic History , 44 (1984), pp. 27-47.
- Wrigley, E. A., 'The fall of marital fertility in nineteenth-century France: exemplar or exception?', European Journal of Population , 1 (1985), pp. 31-60, 141-77.
- Wrigley, E. A., Poverty, progress and population (Cambridge, 2004).
- Wrigley, E. A., Energy and the English industrial revolution (Cambridge, 2010).
- Wrigley, E.A., Davies, R. S., Oeppen, J. E., and Schofield, R. S., English population history from family reconstitution, 1580-1837 (Cambridge, 1997).
- Wrigley, E. A. and Schofield, R. S., The population history of England 1541-1871: a reconstruction (1981).