<!-- image -->

Women in Germany, 1925-1940: Family, Welfare and Work. Part I

Author(s): Tim Mason

Source: History Workshop , Spring, 1976, No. 1 (Spring, 1976), pp. 74-113

Published by: Oxford University Press

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/4288034

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms

<!-- image -->

Oxford University Press  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to History Workshop

Tim Mason

## WOMEN IN GERMANY, I925-I940: FAMILY, WELFARE AND WORK.' Part I

'If we say the world of the man is the state, the world of the man is his commitment, his struggle on behalf of the community, we could then perhaps say that the world of the woman is a smaller world. For her world is her husband, her family, her children and her home. But where would the big world be if no-one wanted to look after the small world ? How could the big world continue to exist, if there was noone to make the task of caring for the small world the centre of their lives? No, the big world rests upon this small world! The big world cannot survive if the small world is not secure.'

Adolf Hitler, speech to the National Socialist Women's organization, Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September, 1934.2

In the winter of 1939/1940 the nazi regime faced a major internal crisis. The mobilization of resources for war was inadequate in every respect; the German people, in particular the industrial working class, showed no enthusiasm for a war of aggression, no willingness to make further sacrifices in the interests of imperial expansion. Discontent and anxiety were apparent in all walks of life, and the conservative resistance to nazi rule developed briefly into a serious political and military conspiracy. A large part of Poland had been conquered, but Britain and France were at war with Germany. In the armed forces and among the civilian population morale was low; rationing, blackouts, overtime, shortages of all kinds and the evacuation of people from frontier areas heightened the general sense of foreboding and insecurity.

It was against this background of pressing external and internal dangers that the leaders of the Third Reich discussed the question of conscripting women into war industries. The issue was very much a part of the overall domestic crisis for the need to get more women into regular work was no longer questioned -of all the shortages, the shortage of labour posed the most severe threat to the German war effort. The need demanded to be met at once, and so conscription seemed the only practical measure. After long deliberations the government decided against conscription. It was an important decision which had farreaching consequences for the population of Germany and of German-occupied Europe in the following war years.

The decision was not easy to understand at first; it seemed initially unnecessary and in some measure untypical of nazi policies. The need to make sense of it was one of the reasons why I became interested in the position of women and the family in German society in the I930s. This particular question has retained its importance and it will be discussed in some detail in the second part of this article, which will appear in the next number of the journal. The attempt to answer it however led backwards and outwards to a range of new topics and problems, for the government's decision had a long and difficult history.

In respect of its attitudes and policies towards women, National Socialism was the most repressive and reactionary of all modern political movements. And yet it seems that the overtly anti-feminist policies of the regime after I933 were at least partially successful, in that they secured the approval, perhaps gratitude, of many German people, men and women alike; partially successful too, in blocking and turning back the social, economic and educational pressures which had been conducive to gradual progress towards emancipation in the preceding decades. At the very least, there is scarcely any evidence that the policies adopted on the family and on women's work were unpopular, despite the fact that they ran directly counter to basic liberal, democratic and socialist principles, principles which seemed to have been widely accepted during the I920S.

Why was this the case? And what was the significance of these developments? These two deceptively simple questions cannot be answered in isolation. They each raise a large number of further questions, both about the position of women in German society in the inter-war years and about basic features of national socialist rule. This paper is thus concerned with a series of large, complex and inter-connected themes: with the nature and political function of nazi antifeminism; with the forms and consequences of the regime's anti-emancipatory welfare policies; with the role of women and of the family in the political economy of German imperialism before I945; with the contradictions inherent in the attempt to combine the protective repression of women with a policy of war and territorial expansion; and, most important of all, with the social bases of national socialist power after I933/34. Such general themes do not lend themselves easily to discussion in a brief historical essay: they call for a long and detailed book. But it is not only on account of the need for brevity that at many points in the following pages the argument is perfunctory and speculative, or the evidence adduced remains incomplete, or the relationship between the descriptive and the interpretative sections becomes uncertain. It is to some degree unavoidable, for, since Clifford Kirkpatrick published his thoughtful and detaile empirical study in I938, Nazi Germany: its Women and Family Life, very little new research has been done into this aspect of modern German social history. Much important work is being done at the moment-interestingly enough all of it, as far as I am aware, by women scholars-but, with the exception of Jill Stephenson's thesis 'Women in German Society I930-I940', few results are yet available.3 And my own research has not been systematic enough to warrant an attempt to write a book.4

The paper is also tentative in a second sense. While it does not address itself to the theoretical problems, now much debated in Britain and the United States, of constructing a 'women's history', it is inevitably-but indirectly-of contemporary relevance: it was actually prompted, not to say demanded by

socialist members of the women's libera their insistent encouragement that I owe my ideas on the structures of national socialist domination. Attempts to account for the durability and efficiency of the nazi regime, attempts to under stand its capacity to enforce the dynamic integration of a conffict-ridden society which simply ignore the position of rather more than half the members of that society and make no reference to the family as a public institution, are unlikely to possess much explanatory power. My own previous work has been weak in this respect.

The women's movements in Britain and the United States, which are significantly stronger and more active than their counterparts in West Germ have helped decisively in the past six years to revive the theoretical and histo discussions of the I920S and I930S on the role of the family and of the sexu division of labour in modern capitalist societies-discussions which, on accoun of their debts to Marx and Freud, were obliterated in the epoch of fascism, together with the many movements of the period for the emancipation of women. 5 The study of anti-feminism is one of the directions which these discussions can now take. There is no shortage of source materials, and this line of enquiry may help to fill out, modify and give historical context to general theories on the role of the family under industrial capitalism. In a comparative context, the oppression of women in nazi Germany furnishes the most extreme case of antifeminism in the 20th century. Quite apart from the fact that the social, economic, medical and cultural conditions which define the position of women in Western Europe have changed decisively since I945, it is the extreme character of National Socialism which makes it unhelpful to draw any direct parallels with the present. But it is arguable that the antagonistic pressures to which women were subjected in Germany in the I930s, the extraordinary contradictions in the policy of the nazi regime towards women and the family-the multiple exploitation and the simultaneous repressive protection-reveal, precisely because of their exceptional character, some fundamental and general features of the problem, which are less visible in times when the crisis of modern capitalism has been latent rather than manifest.

The results, which are highly provisional, also draw attention to one socialhistorical point, which is perhaps of direct contemporary relevance: the general predominance of the specifically modern, urban/suburban, small family, in which the woman either does not work outside the house at all, or works as a regular wage- or salary-earner, is a much more recent phenomenon than critical social scientists have tended to assume. The growth and spread of this type of small family in Western Europe was a trend above all of the period since I900, and the real (as opposed to the demagogic) achievement of National Socialism was merely to accelerate this trend in Germany. The proportion of adults in the population who have remained unmarried has decreased steadily and rapidly over the last ioo years. In the short period between I9IO and I939 the proportion of adult men (over I8) in Germany who did not marry at all fell from 33-8% to 26.7%, the proportion of adult women from 28.2% to 23.i%. The absolute number of married couples rose by almost 6 million over the same period. A large part of this increase was concentrated in the years I933 to I939.6 The archaic imagery of the fertile, dutiful, harmonious peasant or artisan household

invoked by conservative and nazi propaganda, and the endless verbiage about the blessings of motherhood served to obscure the fact that the most significant changes which took place after 1933 consisted in the option of an increasing number of young people for the type of small family, which is now an almost universal social institution. The women's movements of today are thus confronting social structures, conventions and attitudes which are in many respects of comparatively recent origin, and it is in this context, at least as much as in respect of its distinctive, reactionary-utopian ideology, that National Socialism is of a certain contemporary relevance.

The paper is constructed around the treatment of two main topics: part I deals with the policies and attitudes of the regime towards women, the family, the birth-rate and the welfare of children; part II will discuss the employment of women outside the home. This division of the subject permits a juxtaposition of nazi ideology with the social realities, and it also reflects the real change in emphasis in the regime's policies which took place in the later I930s, when the labour shortage made industry increasingly dependent upon women workers. Although it does have these advantages, such a division of the material can be defended only if it enhances the clarity of presentation-in substantive terms it is a schematic and artificial device, for it is exactly the inter-relations of the two topics which raise the important issues of interpretation.

## The Position of Women after World War I

First, however, it is necessary to give a brief sketch of the social structure of the female population of Germany in the I920S, for the picture which emerges contains a number of remarkable features which need continually to be borne in mind in all discussions of the nazi period. The first such feature is the numerical preponderance of women over men. Nearly I-7 million German soldiers were killed in the First World War. Throughout the inter-war years there were roughly 2 million more women than men; in I925 there were over 21 mil more women than men aged over 20, Ii million more women in the age-group 25-40. 67.7% of the male population aged over 20 was married, but only just 6o% of adult women. The census of 1925 showed that there were 2-8 million widows, 500,000 more than there had been in the same territory in I9IO, and single women accounted for almost three-quarters of the I103 million singleperson households. Many women who wished to marry could not do so, and the consequences of the Great War undoubtedly forced many widows, spinsters and fatherless daughters who would otherwise have stayed at home, to seek regular employment.7

The number of economically active women seems to have increased steadily from the I870s on, but the census statistics for the late igth and early 20th centuries probably understate by a wide margin the extent of part-time and noncontractual labour carried out by women, and thus exaggerate the rapidity of the rise in the number of working women after I9I4, which may well have been as much due to better counting by the census-takers as to real changes in the labour market. The rate of increase in women's employment during the main period of industrialization was certainly not faster than that for men.8 By 1925 there

were 22'06 million men aged I5 ally active; and 24-28 million worked for their living in one way or another. Thus a clear majority of adult women lived either from unearned income, or from pensions, or-the greatest number-from the earnings of their husbands or children: they did not work at all outside the house. The socially useful labour of almost I3 million adult women was confined to caring for present and future members of the active labour force.9

It is vital at this point to clarify the categories used in the German census and labour statistics. 'Economically active' (erwerbstdtig) is a census category which comprehends all persons who performed, part-time or full-time, productive work of any kind, except housework, whether they were employed, self-employed, or the so-called 'family assistants' (mithelfende Familienangehorige). It is particularly helpful for the study of women's work that the German censuses, unlike the British, tried to count the 'family assistants', though they had no contract of employment, no insurance, and often worked for irregular periods of time without a regular wage. Reliable figures covering these three categories are available only for the census years I907/1IO, I925, I933, I939. The category of the 'employed' (Beschaftigte) is much narrower, since it comprehended only those whose work was of such a kind that they had to join the state sickness insurance schemes, i.e. almost exclusively wage- and salary-earners who either were in regular employment or were registered as unemployed. These distinctions are of great importance in quantitative terms: in I925 for example there were II 5 million 'economically active' women, but of these only 4-2 million were 'employed' (or unemployed); thus only just over one third of all 'economically active' women were wage- or salary-earners. In this article I have kept to these definitions. They are not satisfactory, but it is not possible to recategorize th statistical source materials. Thus when the text refers to 'women workers' or to 'the employed population' the remarks are confined to those whose work (when they had any) was regular, paid, contractual and subject to sickness insurance.

The years from I9I6 (mobilization for the war effort) to I929 (onset of the world economic crisis) were a period of intense and rapid transition in the employment patterns of those women who did work outside the home. Older types of work, many of them pre-industrial in kind, persisted alongside a proliferation of new employment opportunities in commerce, administration and industry, and in the I920S women had a remarkably wide range of different roles in the economy. This diversity of occupations reflected in an accentuated form the unequal development of German capitalism as a whole, and the tensions within a social and economic structure in which some of the world's biggest and technically most advanced industrial monopolies coexisted uneasily with large numbers of primitive peasant farms and economically precarious corner-shops.

The figures cited above from the I925 census show, however, that despite the cumulative and on-going changes wrought by industrialization, bureaucratization and the growth of towns, in the later I920S a clear majority of all economically active women were still engaged in menial tasks in the least modern sectors of the economy. No fewer than 4,I33,000 female family assistants were counted in I925, and later censuses showed that this figure was itself too low. These women worked on the farms, in the shops, bars, cafes and workshops of their husbands, fathers or other male relatives. Though their work was often

irregular-many of them also had to look after the family-it was frequently essential for the survival of these enterprises, most of which were very small family undertakings. Family assistants enjoyed no contractual rights, they were in practice left unprotected by labour legislation, and it is likely that many of the women received no money wages at all. They formed a crucial part of the agricultural labour force. There were 3,578,ooo female family assistants on Germany's farms in I925, that was, on average, just over one for every holding of more than I-25 acres. Practically nothing appears to be known about the lives of these women, nor about the female agricultural labourers (wage-earners), of whom there were also still just over i million in I925, but their lot was certainly hard: the wives of farmers, agricultural labourers and rural craftsmen had more children than women whose husbands had urban occupations (in Prussia on average twice as many), and their double burden of work and family was thus that much heavier;'0 second, much of the work on the small under-mechanized holdings was back-breaking manual labour. The number of economically active women in German agriculture declined steadily in the I920S, partly, it seems, because the available employment was limited and it was the women rather than the men who came under pressure to try their luck in the uncertain labour markets of the towns." Yet the figures were still very high: taken together, farm family assistants and agricultural labourers constituted the largest single group of women in the labour force in I9254-63 million persons.

The lot of the 450,000 female family assistants in other sectors of the economy was probably less harsh-most of them were behind the counter in the family shop. But the element of male domination in peasant farming, the retail trade, handicrafts and other trades in which there was still room for miniscule enterprises, is brought out clearly by the fact that in I925 only I'3 million m still had to escape from ill-paid and non-contractual employment as family assistants: it was a distinctively female economic role, an attractive proposition probably only to those men who stood to inherit the farm or business. Men formed, of course, the overwhelming majority of the proprietors of such small enterprises. The number of female proprietors in agriculture, handicrafts and retailing declined rapidly from the I9OOS to the I940s, despite the fact that there were so many more widows and spinsters in the post-war years; they appear often to have been excluded from inheriting and/or running family enterprise of this kind; or perhaps those who did inherit were the most eligible candidates for re-marriage. We do not know. It is clear only that many German warwidows found employment as wage- or salary-earners in trade, transport, publi administration and domestic service. Their history has yet to be written.'2

The number of women wage-earners increased during this same period; the First World War temporarily accentuated this trend. In I925, almost 5 million women were employed regularly for a weekly wage, a larger number than the category of family assistants; but as noted above, over i million of these women wage-earners were employed on the land, and a further I 3 million were domestic servants. Several hundred thousand more women were still employed in domestic outwork. '3 In industry and handicrafts there were only 2-2 million women manual workers, and they were concentrated to a very great extent in a few branches of industry-above all in clothing and textiles and in the food processing

industries-and in badly paid unskilled or semi-skilled jobs. One effect of the rationalization movement in German industry in the later I920S was to increase the demand of large modern firms for unskilled female labour. In an effort to restore the competitive position of their exports and to offset rising wage costs, firms in the clothing, footwear, chemicals, electrical goods and light engineering industries went in for big investment programmes, which led either to the displacement of skilled male labour from older trades or to the installation of entirely new and highly mechanized production processes. In both cases employers hired unskilled women where possible, on account of their alleged docility and their low wage rates.'4

The most significant and rapid change in the employment of women was taking place in the sector of non-manual employment: in I925 there were almost million women white-collar workers, three times as many as in I907. The growing bureaucratization of public life and of industrial enterprises, together with the rapid development of large-scale trading and retailing organizations created in the cities a rapidly increasing number of subordinate jobs for young women as clerks, typists, sales girls and minor administrators. These jobs appear to have been eagerly sought after-the work was clean, less strenuous than factory work, and some, though not all of the occupations carried at least vicarious membership of the middle class with them, together with relatively high earnings, and better social insurance protection and job security than wageearners enjoyed. The expansion of this respectable sector of women's employment was a product of long-term changes in social, economic and administrative organization, but this development too was speeded up by the rationalization movement in industry, with its frequently absurd emphasis on administrative procedures, supervision, filing systems and the general convenience of managers. '5

Very few women rose to positions of independence, responsibility or high professional status during the years of the Weimar Republic, and those who did do not seem to have gained easy acceptance. The decade between the revolution of I9I8/I9 and the world economic crisis was too short and too unstable a period for the new constitutional guarantee of equal rights for women to be translated into far-reaching changes in social and occupational structures; and liberal principles were rarely matched by liberal practice in the upper classes of society. Some changes were perhaps beginning to take place by the late I920S and early I930s-there were over I9,000 women students at German universities in I93Ibut it was only in the medical profession and in public administration that middle class women had succeeded in establishing themselves in significant numbers. There were some 3,500 women doctors and a considerably larger number of female public officials, but most of them were characteristically concerned with women's illnesses, social welfare, women's affairs, etc; and women civil servants did not enjoy the same job security as men.'6 The numbers of women in responsible positions in the legal profession and in the universities rose slightly, but remained derisory.'7 Overall, the pressures, conventions and prejudices which professional women had to defy in order to pursue their careers proved to be strong and tenacious. Thus the most important single source of employment for educated women remained school-teaching; the numbers of women teachers rose slowly but steadily to almost ioo,ooo in I925, but they were mostly in less well paid posts than men and relatively few women teachers advanced to senior

positions: they were thought to be best su boys were to be taught by men. The only other large group of non-manual women workers, the I30,000 nurses, enjoyed the customary combination of high prestige with subordinate status and poor pay and working conditions.'8

The irends of future development appeared relatively clear in the late I920s: the level of women's employment in agriculture would continue to decline quite rapidly; the number of women industrial workers would continue to grow steadily as the rationalization movement and technological advance generated more and more routine, light and unskilled jobs for which women were thought to be suitable; and the ranks of the typists and salesgirls, who enjoyed a brief and falsely glamorized interlude of personal independence in the urban centres, would continue to expand at a fast pace.

These do indeed seem to be the lines along which social change took place in the four years after the I925 census. In fact the number of insured women with regular employment increased very rapidly in the short period of relative stabilization in the later I920s: it rose by just 20% from 5 million to 6 (7 5) million between the late summer of I925 and the late summer of 1929-a remarkable change, when one remembers that these were not years of all-round full employment.'9 Many women of course continued during this period of their dependent roles as domestic servants, family assistants and domestic outworkers. More detailed information on the patterns of women's employment in the later I920S is not available, since the next census was not taken until I933, and by then the economic situation was very different. It looks, however, as though it would be worth investigating the hypothesis that the growth in the employment of women wage-earners and white-collar workers between I925 and I929 was sufficiently sharp to activate the anti-feminist resentments which were so powerful during the subsequent years of economic crisis. This crisis brought to an abrupt and violent end the trend towards the increased employment of women in insured occupations, though it did not thereby qui the anxieties and resentments of men. And the effects of the depression in constricting economic opportunities for women were to some extent reinforced by the policies of the nazi regime in 1933 and I934.

The most striking feature of this picture of women's employment in the I920S is its diversity. Whereas in Britain the female agricultural labourer had, accordingly to the doubtless inaccurate official statistics, all but disappeared by the end of the igth century,20 in Germany in 1925, 4-6 million women did work of this kind, either paid or unpaid: not a few of them laboured in close geographical proximity to cities in which there were large numbers of fashionconscious young typists and clerks, some women doctors, civil servants and headmistresses, to say nothing of the film stars, actresses, dancers, politicians and writers, on whom so much public attention was focussed. The existence of these latter groups demonstrated in turn that the typical roles of working wo were changing at a comparatively rapid rate: it was a highly dynamic diversity, in which the ever expanding demand for women clerical staff was the main motor of transformation. The subject still has to be investigated in detail, but it seems most probable that the extraordinarily unequal development in the social and economic position of women during the I920S was a cause of deep social tensions, which finally found political expression in the nazi movement.

The city of Berlin for example, comprehended and most effectively symbolized everything that German conservatives and reactionaries hated and feared about the development of public life under the Weimar Republic. As if it were not enough that the capital city should be a stronghold of the political left, the cosmopolitan centre of liberal and socialist journalism and of radical modern experiments in entertainment and the arts, Berlin was the city where bright young women went out to work and demonstratively enjoyed themselves. It had by some distance the lowest birth-rate of all regions in the country, and by far the highest divorce rate; the birthrate was indeed the lowest for any city in the world: in I933 just over 35% of all married couples in Berlin were childless, nearly twice the national average, a fact which was attributed-not without evidence-to the high abortion rate in the city. In short, in the eyes of right-thinking citizens in the provinces, Berlin had become a threateningly large wilderness of sterile promiscuity, hedonism, degeneracy and unnatural progress. The-much exaggerated-new independence of women appeared to have a prominent part in the insidious development of this 'asphalt culture', as Goebbels was to call it. 2

As already noted however, the majority of German women did not work outside the home in I925 and most of these 13 million women were married. Except in one respect it is impossible to generalize briefly-or, for that matter, at lengthabout their position and about German family life in this period. Family law, which gave the husband almost exclusive rights over his wife's property and their children, remained unchanged in the I920S, and many observers, of whom the most noted in our own day is perhaps Talcott Parsons, expressed the view that German women were in general more deferential to their menfolk than women in Britain or the United States.22 The large numbers of family assistants and the small numbers of female proprietors suggest that this idea was not entirely without foundation, at least as far as the economically independent middle classes were concerned; and the very success of the anti-feminist campaigns after I929 also indicates that this notion would be worth investigating further. But in the absence of comparative studies, little weight can be attached to the hypothesis; the evidence is still indirect and impressionistic, no more.

Whatever the nature of their relations with their fathers and then with their husbands, the position of married women did change quite drastically in the one respect which probably mattered most to them: the size of families declined at an exceptionally rapid rate. This change was common to practically all European countries in the later igth and early 20th centuries, but in it was compressed into a much shorter period than in France or Britain and the extent of the change was probably greater.23

In the early I89os there were each year 303 births per I,OOO married women of child-bearing age; in I932, IOI.

Of those couples who had married before I9I3 and were still together in I933, 47.I% had had 4 or more children; of those who married in I913 or after, I I 6%. 4

At the time of the I933 census 62.8% of all married women had fewer than three children.

In I9IO, 22-I million out of a total of 64-6 million German citizens were children aged under I5; in I933, I5-8 out of 66 million.

The number of households containing six or more persons fell by 524,000 in

the I5 years between I910 and I925; i households of this size, in I925, 35.4%.

By the I920S the trend towards smaller families among the urban population ha become overwhelmingly predominant. In every German town the mean size of household had fallen below four persons by I933. Only in agricultural districts did households of six or more persons account for more than one-third of the total number. The proportion among households in which the breadwinner worked in industry, trade or administration was very much lower-in the latter case one-ninth. The break-down of these figures according to social class both confirms and amplifies the picture, for households in which the breadwinner was self-employed (that is, in the main, peasant farmers, craftsmen and shop-keepers) were on average larger than those in which the breadwinner was a wage-earner, and very much larger than those in which the breadwinner was a white-collar worker.

Despite the slaughter of the war, the number of separate households in the Germany of I933 was 39% higher than in the same area in I910 (the population increase over the same period was I2-80%), and this expansion was massively concentrated among the small household units:

The number of households consisting of two persons rose by 98% in these twenty-three years, of those with three persons by 92% and of those with four persons by 52%.

By I933 well over half of the population of the country lived in small households of one to four persons; in I910 it had been just over one-third.25

These pallid statistics bear terse witness to changes in the life style of a large proportion of the population, which, in their scale and their suddenness, were little short of revolutionary. They had been compressed into a single generation. The parents of the typical small families of the I920S were themselves typically offspring of the large families of the i88os and I89os. In the I920S more and more people were getting married, and they were having fewer and fewer children. This amounted to a fundamental change in the life-situation of adult women.

Yet Renate Bridenthal is certainly right to insist that the degree of social and economic emancipation achieved by German women in the years of the Weimar Republic has been very greatly exaggerated; and, to her observations on the evidence of the occupational statistics, one can add the generalization that there was probably nothing especially emancipated about the lives of the growing numbers of young housewives and mothers in all social classes, who stayed at home to look after their husbands and their one or two children. It was a highly restricted role, which perhaps involved less independent responsibility in sustaining the family than had often been exercised by the wives of farmers, craftsmen and workers in an earlier industrial era; and for an anxious possessive mother, whose ambition is displaced on to her child, a single son or daughter can be quite as much of a burden as four or five children may have been to a woman who also had to work the fields or help in the workshop, and thus left her children to their own devices.25 In the post-war years, with their crises of civil strife, inflation and depression, these new constraints upon the role of the modern housewife in the working and the lower middle classes were not often

compensated for by the contem boredom, safe routine and enforced inactivity, which figure largely among the charges against marriage made by women liberationists today, were not, one imagines, among the major problems of housewives who were responsible for bringing up children and managing a narrow family budget during the years of revolution and hyper-inflation, I9I9-I924, or in the period of mass unemployment after I929. Furthermore, in Germany, as in all European countries, the housing situation remained in the I920S a cause of acute anxiety and suffering for most of the population-a burden which fell especially upon women. And for the 8oo,ooo women (I925) who both worked away from home and managed their households, little was done in the I920S to relieve this crushing double burden. The number of married women who bore this double burden was increasing steadily-among female industrial workers the increase was over 300,000 (I29%) from I907 tO I933.27

Yet when all of these qualifications have been made, the rapid extension of birth-control and the growing preference of married couples for small families, both such marked features of the I920s, were beginning to create conditions under which the social and economic emancipation of women could, perhaps for the first time, realistically be discussed and fought for. The characteristic preindustrial life-cycle of poor women: heavy manual labour from an early age, punctuated after marriage by repeated pregnancies which often ended in early death-this cycle had been decisively broken. More precisely, it had been confined to parts of the country and to sectors of society which were shrinki in both absolute and relative terms. Yet these sectors were still comparatively large, and their customs and values which so recently had been those of the whole society, still exercised wide public influence.

The many public battles over family policy and the status of women in the I920S tended to end in stalemate situations, in which progressive forces gained only small or insecure concessions. Thus the law on abortion was not materially relaxed, although the vocal and well-organized proponents of family planning fought an impressive campaign on this issue. And family allowances were not generally introduced-only higher civil servants received them as a matter of course (they tended to have particularly small families!), but for the rest the state confined its action to encouraging public and private employers to pay a family wage. The legislative protection and insurance benefits given to women wage- and salary-earners in the event of pregnancy were greatly extended in I927, but the provision of day nurseries and other facilities necessary in order to encourage women to try to reconcile family and work or career remained patchy. Vigorous propaganda was conducted on behalf of modern methods of birth-control, a number of family planning clinics were established and some local branches of the state sickness insurance scheme began to offer advice on contraception, but the number of illegal abortions remained exceptionally high. The constitution of the Republic guaranteed equality between the sexes, but the government itself could continue to defy with impunity an explicit constitutional guarantee of equal treatment for men and women civil servants. The parties of the left never gained unequivocal power over the state in the Weimar Republic, and it was not least for this reason that changes in policies, institutions and ideologies of central importance to the 'woman question' were much less definiti

than the contemporaneous changes in the birth-rate, family size and occupational patterns-these latter were much less directly subject to the distribution of political power.28

The fall in the birth-rate, for example, provoked a major ideological onslaught from the extreme right in which many of the themes of later nazi policies were clearly pre-figured. Social scientists saw the prospect of imminent demographic disaster; they began to discuss the margin by which the number of births was falling below the level necessary to replace the existing population, and to argue about the precise future date at which population decline in absolute terms would set in. The overtly reactionary school of writing on this subject exhibited a wondrous blend of technical expertise and racial imperialist hysteria, of scholarly diligence and unthinking axiomatic hostility to the emancipation of women. The most respected of the prophets of power politics and high fertility was Friedrich Burgd6rfer. He systematically translated his statistical tables into the language of alarmist journalism. He described the declining birth-rate among the German minorities of Eastern Europe, for example, as a 'bio-political struggle'. He wrote of the growing preference of German parents for small families as though it were the Red Army advancing from the East: 'the two-child family system is on the march'. 'Our people', he proclaimed, 'is like an obsolete fleet, for not enough new keels are being laid down to rep it'-echoes of the Dreadnought-race with Britain before I94! 'In biological terms the German people is pressing forwards towards the precipice'. In order to make sure of terrorizing his readers, Burgd6rfer printed large black diagrams which showed what would happen if the trends of the I920S continued unchanged: by A.D. 2075 the descendants of the 4 million Berliners (I925) would number I00,000; and if every married couple produced only two children, after 300 years the descendants of I,000 adults would number exactly eight! He also made great play of the reluctance of the educated ruling class to have large families, and so he then went on to demonstrate that this class could extinguish itself in six generations, and thus leave the country in the hands of rough, ignorant and prolific workers.

What was needed? 'A religious-moral revival, a spiritual transformation . . . which will restore to the people the morally serious will to live'. And, his voice rising to a strident pitch of tautologous paranoia, 'For us today it is a matter, no more and no less, of the self-assertion of the German people and of German culture by the German people and for the German people'. A fit of dedicated idealism, Burgd6rfer seemed to think, would solve Germany's population problems and make her a great power again, just as nazi propagandists pretended that idealism would also obliterate class conflict. Burgdorfer achieved success by prostituting his scholarship in the cause of national aggrandizement. A note to the effect that even on the most pessimistic reckoning the total population of Germany would continue to increase until the later I940S was hidden away in his flood of pejoratives about 'dwarf-families' and their opposites, 'child-happy parents'. Burgdorfer's technical virtuosity was matched only by the insatiable quality of his desire to gain public attention for his new method of calculating the replacement rate of populations. The lurid manner in which he prosecuted his case was grist to the eager mills of nazi propagandists. The work of creating fear and anxiety, the work of confusing the issues and of linking the

movement of national fortunes done for them by men of high scholarly repute. It goes without saying that Burgd6rfer and his fellow prophets were quite oblivious to the interests of women in having smaller families; this he saw mainly as a financial problem, and advocated family allowances.229

There was in Germany in the I920S no fundamental sea-change in social attitudes of a kind which is perhaps beginning to take place in Britain and the United States today, and which promises to make a re-imposition of cruder forms of discrimination and stereotyping simply inconceivable in the future. Those opposed to and disturbed by the progress of women towards equality of rights in German society in the I920S suffered a series of minor defeats, but the interests and attitudes to which they were committed never suffered a decisive reverse on any issue in which they could influence the outcome. Indeed they seemed to gather strength from the accumulation of diffuse challengesideological, political, economic and 'biological'-which partial liberalization and on-going social change furnished to male domination of German society during this turbulent decade. And whereas the cause of women's emancipation was necessarily, on account of its complexity and its ramifications in every sphere of social and political life, promoted by a very wide range of small and normally unco-ordinated groups with different partial goals and conflicting political outlooks, the cause of the restoration of men's pre-eminence could be made to appear a relatively simple single issue and could be pre-empted by a single political movement of incomparably greater power.

## Women and Family 1933-1940

## National Socialism and Women to 1933

The nazi regime had a more clearly defined and more self-conscious attitude towards women than perhaps any other modern government. It was avowedly illiberal and protective in its aims. Although its practice was more illiberal and less protective than its declared intentions, some important welfare reforms were enacted, and the political leaders clearly regarded women as a very special category among the ruled. In their eyes women were that part of the population on whom, if it was at all possible, novel, major and general hardships should not arbitrarily or continuously be inflicted. What did or did not constitute a hardship in this respect, was of course decided upon by the political leadership alone, but, although they appear to have taken little advice on this question even from the party's own women's organizations, Hitler and his colleagues were demonstrabl sensitive to popular prejudices, fears and interests in the formulation of their policies towards women. More precisely, they were sensitive to what they thought popular attitudes were.

Thus although the regime initially adopted its protective line, its emphasis on motherhood and the home, out of paternalistic and eugenic conviction, the leadership group later came to think, probably rightly, that German men would deeply resent the imposition on women of the sorts of hardship which they were being called upon to bear themselves. This was not just a matter of paternalistic

'altruism' among German men, of fixed notions concerning the proper division of roles between the sexes, though such attitudes were probably widespread in all classes.30 More important was perhaps the fact that in a variety of ways, not least in a material sense, men were the direct, perhaps the main beneficiaries of the regime's policies towards women. Family allowances increased the income of the whole household; after I939 it was both comfortable and re-assuring to workers and soldiers to know (where this was in fact the case) that their wives were at home with their children, and not being forced to work in factories; and in many parts of the country it was also a matter of social status and prestige to be the head of a household in which the women did not need to take employment. Thus the nazi regime's policies towards women, were in fact policies towards the family, policies towards the whole population. They constituted arguably the only new and comprehensive social policies which the regime implemented in the 1930s. The question of the position of women in the Third Reich was thus a question of the broadest political significance.

A variety of different sources convey the impression that in the later 1930S the Third Reich enjoyed a large measure of active and passive support from among Germail women, a larger measure than it gained from among men. This is a very vague and uncertain judgement, and it may be that the political attitudes of women in these years can never be the subject of exact or confident generalization -the source materials are not very helpful. The evidence of movements in the birth-rate and of attitudes to the often conflicting roles of housewife and worker, discussed below, offers indirect support to the hypothesis, as too does the even less secure evidence of newsreel films and of diaries and memoirs. All manner of qualifications have to be made with respect to women in different age groups, women of different social classes, women of different religious confession (or of none) etc. The issue is too complicated and too little researched to be discussed in detail at this point. The low level of women's participation in resistance groups of all political persuasions, in particular in the conservative resistance, also points in the direction of a high degree of passive acceptance of the regime by German women. (This may have been no more than a continuation of the relatively low level of political activity among women before I933).3" By and large, however, although the latter part of the war imposed the most frightful sufferings on women on the 'home front'-bereavement compounded by airraids, evacuation, food shortages and growing pressures to take work in the war industries-most German women fulfilled to a remarkable degree the role assigned to them by Goring in his speech on 9 September 1939: 'the silent sufferers'.'2 There appears to have been much less unrest and opposition among women in I944/45 than in 19I8.

It is at first sight a little surprising that the nazi leadership should have had any success in winning the loyalty and confidence of women. The anti-feminism of the movement before I933 was notorious and extreme. This stance was an integral part of the Nazi Party's general rejection of liberalism in all its aspects, but it was less opportunistic and less superficial than some manifestations of the movement's anti-liberalism. First, it derived to a considerable degree from the party's militarism, an organizing principle of social life which necessarily magnified the distinctions between the sexes and was predicated upon overt and total male supremacy. Second, all racialist movements which take the

biological, pseudo-scientific elem attach particular importance to women's procreative role. A hysterical protective anxiety on behalf of guileless German women was one of the hallmarks of Hitler's fantasies on the subject of 'Jewish pollution of the German racial stock' etc. in Mein Kampf, and it formed one of the most persistent themes in later nazi anti-semitic propaganda. The purity of the blood, the numerical power, the vigour of the race were ideological goals of such high priority that all women's activities other than breeding were relegated in party rhetoric to secondary significance.33 Third, it is noteworthy that before I933 the Nazi Party gained support especially among those social groups and classes where the question of the position and rights of women was a live issue: that is, on the one hand in those sectors where emancipation in the liberal sense of the word, farthest advanced and on the other hand in those where women were least emancipated. The programmatic nazi demand, that in the new Germany a woman's place should be in the home, appears to have been well received by men in those types of employment-clerical, administrative and professionalin which women had made the most headway in the I920s, and where there was in consequence a measure of sexual competition for jobs during the depression. Civil servants were laid off in considerable numbers in the course of attempts to balance the budget in I93I and I932, and the census of I933 showed that the total number of male white-collar workers, employed and unemployed, had actually fallen in the preceding eight years, whereas the number of women white-collar workers had continued to rise, despite the economic crisis.34

On the other hand many of the country's approximately 5 million peasant holdings, artisan workshops, small retailing units, hairdressing saloons, restaurants, pubs, etc. were family undertakings, in which the head of the household was the head of the enterprise and in which his female dependents combined household duties with largely unpaid and unregulated work in the fields, behind the counter etc. Nazi propaganda attacks on the 'degeneracy' of childless, educated, decorative city women who smoked and drank, probably struck some deep chords in rural and small-town Germany, where the long-term trend towards the economic emancipation of women posed an indirect but much publicized threat to the dominant value system and to the whole social structure.35

The basic elements of anti-feminism were not, of course, the exclusive prope of the Nazi Party-the outlook was shared by many other socially and politically conservative groups and parties. It was especially strong among t many influential nationalists, who harked back to the Wilhelmine Empire and the manly days before I9I4 when the monarchical constitution and the hierarchial social order were supposedly intact, the civil service ran the country and Germany had the highest birth-rate and the strongest army in Europe. And it was of course on this issue, above all others, that the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church and the ideology of the Catholic Centre Party most nearly approximated to the propaganda tenets of the Nazi Party. The Centre Party's Chancellor Briining, for example, introduced higher tax rates for single persons in I930, and the Papal Encyclical of 193i restated the virtues of traditional family life. The bitter political rivalry between the two parties for the votes of the catholic peasantry, artisans and shop keepers, has tended to disguise the extent of their

common ground in such social matters. This type of partial or apparent consensus on a basic issue among different sectional interests and elite groups was one of the most important foundations of nazi rule. The political implications of such common positions, of which this is an interesting example, did not always become clear until after the seizure of power in I933. (Compare the parallel attitudes of Hitler and the army to rearmament, of the nazi leaders and industrialists to trade unions). The effect was to accelerate the reconciliation of such established groups with the new regime and to broaden its popular appeal after I933. The forces which resisted the emancipatory processes and measures of the I920S thus eased the path of an extreme reaction.

Anti-feminism is an interesting and important political ideology in this respect, for, although it has been much less carefully studied than various forms of racism, it seems to share with these violent types of prejudice the capacity to appeal to groups who are not in any way directly 'threatened' by (and perhaps even have no first-hand experience of) the phenomena to which they object. Just as jews or negroes often become objects of the hatred or fear of people who have no contact with the minority against which they are prejudiced, and thus serve as a focus for general resentments and anxieties which have in origin nothing at all to do with jews or negroes, so also can emancipatory changes in the roles and position of women excite an opposition among men whose own dominance is not immediately challenged. The women question becomes a man question and a political question insofar as it arouses general passions, and is felt to raise general questions about the 'moral', 'natural' and 'biological' order of society. Much more research needs to be done on these issues, but there are some reasons for thinking that anti-feminism did realize its latent capacity to arouse such generalized sentiments in Germany between I928 and I933: much publicity was given to the career woman, so that men who had never seen such a creature could form their own views about the desirability of her existence. One of the most distinguished victims of this type of vilification, Toni Sender, a member of the national parliament (Reichstag) who laboured bravely under the triple burden of being jewish, a Social Democrat and a woman, has left a memorable account of the personal attacks on her by Nationalists and Nazis during the violent election campaigns of I932. They culminated in the repeated assertion that she was a high-class prostitute who only donned proletarian clothes when she went to address workers' meetings. In the poisoned atmosphere of the nazi struggle for power there were few defences against this salacious campaign of defamationthe courts declined to convict those responsible.36

For these reasons, and for others which social psychologists have analyzed and speculated about, anti-feminism was not a minor or opportunistic component of National Socialism, but a central part of it, and a part the importance of which in the years I929-1933 has probably been underrated. This anti-feminism amounted to much more than the notorious demagogic attacks on the 'subversion of traditional moral standards by the jewish-marxist advocates of free love'. David Schoenbaum scarcely exaggerates when he speaks of a 'secondary racism'.37 And yet the relationship between the party's reactionary propaganda on the women question on the one hand, and the fact that women were markedly under-represented among its electoral supporters on the other, was far from simple.

In the last years of the Weimar Republic some liberal women's organizations recognized the dangers of nazi anti-feminism, and warned women not to vote for the party. For rather different reasons, and perhaps with greater effect, workingclass women's organizations took the same line. The influence of the women's organizations, both in general and in this particular respect, is difficult to assess. It was widely thought that the various women's movements made relatively little progress in changing public and private attitudes during the I920S, and at the end of that decade the liberal women's organizations appear to have become weak, disunited and increasingly conservative.38 As Gabriele Bremme has shown, however, there was no clear correlation, either positive or negative, between the attitude of the political parties to the woman question and the political preferences of women voters in the last five years of the Weimar Republic. Fewer enfranchised women actually voted in elections than men, though the proportion of women who did exercise their new constitutional right grew slowly in the later I920S and early I930s; the lowest turnout was among women in rural areas. Those who voted showed a marked preference for parties which, in the local or regional context, occupied conservative positions, in particular for parties which were favourably disposed towards the major churches. This latter point probably goes a long way towards explaining the very high women's vote for the anti-feminist Centre Party and the relatively low women's vote for the anti-feminist Nazi Party. (Aside from the rising level of electoral participation, the only notable change in women's political preferences in the last elections before I933 evidently resulted from the abandonment by some working- and middle-class women of their picture of Social Democracy as a party of violent revolution and atheism-but even this change was probably more apparent than real, for there are strong grounds for supposing that the rising proportion of women among social democratic voters merely reflected the desertion of the reformist party in favour of the Communist Party by male working-class voters.)39

Thus the new party of the radical right did not fit at all easily into the German political scene in this respect: to women voters (and not only to them) it did not represent a typical conservative party. Up tO I930 and to a lesser extent afterwards, it perhaps suffered from a further electoral disadvantage, in that there appears to have been a widespread if inconclusive reaction among German women against the slaughter of World War I, and a reluctance, encouraged by the women's movements of all colours, to support programmes which would condemn further generations of women to the loss of their husbands and sons in war.40 These factors should not be overemphasized, however, for the proportion of women's votes in the total nazi vote seems to have been rising slow but steadily after I928, and in I932 a large number of women clearly did vote for the Nazi Party; in doing so they were almost certainly acting as most, though by no means all, German women did, and following the political lead of the head of their household.4' It remains nonetheless significant, that men were substantially over-represented among Hitler's supporters in the presidential elections of 1932, and women even more markedly over-represented among those who voted for the incumbent President, the conservative Field Marshal von Hindenburg, who was supported by the Centre Party and the Social Democrats. Women did not rush in overwhelming numbers, as has frequently been asserted,

to the support of the movement which feminine protective subordination. In January I933 the new regime thus had some lee-way to make up in gaining the confidence of German women.'2

## Women's Place

That it was able nonetheless to implement with impunity a wide range of antifeminist policies in the years I933-I936 was perhaps due less to its usurpation of dictatorial powers than to the comprehensive dislocation of the social order caused by the world economic crisis. The eugenic and procreative emphasis of these policies was firmly stated from the outset: in June 1933, for example, Frick (Minister of the Interior) called on middle-class women in particular to be sensible of their duty to the race and to produce large numbers of healthy and intelligent children.'3 But at this stage such talk was overshadowed by a comprehensive attack on the employment of women, in particular of married women. The disruption and uncertainty of social life, the widespread poverty and disorientation, the pervasive sense of crisis, had created conditions in which any governmental initiatives of this kind were bound to produce a variety of different effects at the same time, and thus to appeal to different people in different ways, to be open to a variety of different interpretations and propagandistic justifications. Nazi policies towards women in the years I933-I934 furnish an excellent example of this ambiguity, of the way in which the multipurpose character of the regime's early measures derived from the fact that the selfregulating mechanisms of economic and social development had ground to a halt: for the long-term and basic racial, military and population goals of the movement both matched with and were disguised by short-term policies to cope with the crisis of unemployment, which had done so much to accentuate antagonism between the sexes in the labour market. Thus the slogan 'work for married men' could be justified in crude 'sexist' terms, in terms of social equity and utility (reducingfamily poverty) and in terms of population policy (areas with the highest level of women's employment had the lowest birth-rates).

However, the nazi attempt to reduce the numbers of working women in fact gave no more than insignificant re-inforcement to a trend in the labour market which was already very strong indeed before January I933, for the crisis had already pushed a large number of women out of the work-force entirely. This trend was visible even in the census of economically active persons, the broad category which included all those who worked irregularly and/or without payment. In I925, 5I 5% of the female population of working age was economically active in this sense, in I933 only 49.3%; in absolute terms, a decline of over 300,000. This figure had been rising steadily over the long term: the rise was not merely checked, but actually significantly reversed in the crisis. The figures for the insured labour force, that is those who worked regularly for a wage or a salary and those who registered themselves as unemployed when they could not find such work, are even more revealing. While the number of men who were in the labour market in this sense fell from September I929 tO January 1933 by 950,000 tO I3*23 million the number of insured women was cut by almost 2-5 million to 5.4 million-a reduction of 3 I.6%. And of this 5-4 million over i million were unemployed.44

But since only I-I3 million women continued to register at the labour exchanges as unemployed in January I933, the overall insurance statistics nurtured the illusion that the crisis had hit women wage- and salary-earners much less hard than it had hit men: 57-2% of all insured men had a job in January I933, 73% of all insured women. The source of this illusory discrepancy lay in the fact that the most important public relief schemes imposed afamily means test during the years of mass unemployment. The unemployment insurance system, in which unemployed working women had an individual right to benefits, had all but collapsed by I932. This meant that unemployed women who lived with their fathers or husbands received little or nothing by way of dole payments, so had little incentive to make the weekly trip to the labour exchange and reg as unemployed. Thus they disappeared from the statistics, while the men, except for adolescent dependents, were still counted because relief was distributed through them.45

The unemployment percentages were accurate in the technical sense, but they completely obscured what was in fact happening-a massive degradation of teen-age girls and older women workers into the ranks of the family assistants and above all into the ranks of the entirely unproductive. This development undoubtedly set back acceptance of the notion that women should and could work outside the home. Nazi propaganda and policy was parasitic on such statistical illusions, parasitic on the resentments and needs of unemployed men, and parasitic on a socio-economic trend the strength of which was anyway overwhelming. By stressing the priority of unemployed male heads of households, the measures adopted in I933/34 tO increase and re-allocate employment opportunities suggested a plausible concern for distributive social justice (in the exact Aristotelian sense!);46 they appealed directly to male self-interest; they suggested to people of conservative and Catholic persuasion that the nazi leadership really did take seriously its rhetoric about the sanctity of the family; and in the form of the marriage loan scheme they met the real economic needs of numerous young couples and at the same time furthered the population policies of the regime.

Competition between the sexes in the labour market was probably most acute among civil servants, white-collar workers of all kinds and in the free professions. Women had gained professional positions in increasing numbers in the I920s, especially in public service; in I933 there were many unemployed men with university and professional qualifications. Tlle Bruning and von Papen governments had already begun to reduce the number of women civil servants in I93I-32, and it was in respect of its own employees that the new government adopted the most firmly and openly discriminatory policies in the following two years. Women, especially married women, were removed from responsible posts in public administration, in the schools men were automatically given precedence for senior positions, and the number of women students was cut back. 47

Despite loud demands from the rank and file of the nazi movement however, the government stopped short of formally compelling women to give lip their jobs in other branches of employment. Families in which husband and wife or father and daughter both had regular work came under great pressure in the years 1933 and I934 to surrender the woman's job for the benefit of unemployed

married men. While the government declined, on the social darwinist grounds that such action would penalize the able and the diligent, to introduce any mandatory procedures for the replacement of such women by men in trade an industry, and while it rejected the denunciations and the more violent forms of agitation which accompanied the campaigns of local nazi groups, official blessing was given to efforts to 'persuade' women who had male bread-winners to withdraw 'voluntarily' from the labour market. It was presented to them as t duty to do so. The assertion of the priority of men's needs coincided with the re-assertion of the virtues of woman's traditional role as housewife and mother. Precisely because these pressures did remain unofficial, it is not possible to say how many women succumbed to them. Some undoubtedly did succumb and were forced by moral blackmail and threats to confine themselves, at least for a time, to domestic routine.48

But the census of June I933 revealed just how closely the stance of the Nazi as he faced the incoming tide. For the proportion of married women among female wage-earners was seen to have risen quite sharply since I925, and the

Party on the question of married women's work resembled that of King Canute overall proportion of married women who were economically active in any manner had also increased slightly-despite the crisis, and despite the assorted discriminatory measures and pressures of the Bruning government and of the Nazi Party.49 It must be admitted that the census was taken before the campaign against double-earnings had reached its full pitch of intensity; it must be stressed that the increase in the employment of married women would almost certainly have been greater had the crisis been less severe and had there been no anti-feminist reaction; and it must also be admitted that the evidence of the census could be interpreted by those who were, for whatever reason, hostile to the regular employment of married women, as renewed proof of the objective need for their campaign.

Yet when all is said and done, the tortuous relationship between the paternalist anti-feminist ideology and the realities of social change in these crisis years remains noteworthy. If the question is first taken as a whole, it is evident that the conservative, catholic and nazi attack on the regular employment of women in general (whether married or single) was most vociferous at a time (I929-I933) when women were anyway leaving the labour market in very large numbers and at a rapid pace for elementary social and economic reasons. On this broad front the anti-feminist reaction was rushing with an impressive display of virile energy through a wide-open door. Exactly the opposite was the case, however, on the narrower front which concerned married, economically active women, and in particular married wage-earners. Here the anti-feminist reaction found itself in head-on collision with a long-term process of social and economic change, which was drawing ever more married women into trade and industry; here paternalists, eugenist zealots and misogynists flailed about themselves with an irrational and noisy mendacity, which was powerless to disrupt the nexus of the joint interests of employers and married women workers. The irreducible facts were that more and more married women were working, partly becaus more and more women of working age were getting married.50

This question requires further research with respect to the years of the economic crisis, for it is not yet clear in what types of employment the increased

numbers of married working women were concentrated. It is highly probable that a part of the increase is accounted for by a rise in the number of wives who worked as family assistants. It is also probable that employers in the industrial and service sectors of the economy preferred to keep on the pay-roll during the crisis years those women whose productivity was highest, that is, women who were experienced in their trades and perhaps semi-skilled. These women were more likely to be married than were teenage girls or women over 5o. Strength is lent to the hypothesis by the fact that women in their 20S and 30s were employed in above average numbers in the consumer goods industries (especially in textiles, clothing and foodstuffs), which were less severely hit by the world slump than most other sectors of industry. If one examines the census evidence by age-groups, it is apparent that between I925 and I933 there was a marked decline in the proportion of women who were economically active only among those aged under i6 or over 50, that is, among those women whose labour power was least productive for the employers. It was the young and the old who were pushed to the wall in the brutal competitive conditions of the crisis years.5'

In socio-economic terms, the campaign against married women who worked was thus a largely ineffectual and deeply irrelevant exercise in paternalistic and male chauvinist demagoguery, the only significant impact of which, outside the professions and the civil service, was to embarrass and intimidate a large number of families. There were two general reasons why it had little effect in most branches of trade and industry: there were relatively few types of work which unemployed men were normally thought to be suited to or trained to take over from women (some white-collar and some unskilled jobs furnished the few exceptions outside the professions); and women's wages wete generally much lower than men's so that either the man who replaced a woman had to accept very low remuneration, or the employer in question had to replace cheap with less cheap labour. Either way, the disadvantages were considerable.52

Neither these various pressures, nor the marriage loan scheme under the terms of which women who received a loan on marrying were required to give up their job, can account for the fact that the level of women's employment in trade, industry and administration did indeed remain low during the first three years of nazi rule. The very slow rate of increase in the insured female labour force

-June 1933: 4-85 million; June I936: 5 63 million53-

was only to a very limited extent a reflection of policies towards women. It was rather an unintended but inevitable consequence of re-armament and of the related attempt by the government to keep wages, and thus consumer purchasing power, at their low crisis levels. For the re-armament boom created jobs above all in the investment goods sector of the economy, where legislation, tradition and the heavy nature of the work combined to restrict very narrowly the employment of women. Well over one half of all women industrial workers were concentrated in the textiles, clothing and foodstuffs industries, which recovered much more slowly from the world economic crisis than did iron and steel, engineering or building.

The attack on the regular employment of women and the campaign for marriage and child-bearing were thus in practice distinct initiatives; they concerned different, though related aspects of economic organisation and personal behaviour, both of which were susceptible to direct political influence only insofar as such

e t ;

&lt; P s \_\_ -

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

interventions ran with the tide of social trends. The distinction was blurred in official propaganda, blurred too by the fact that the two programmes were developed simultaneously. Despite the claims made about its impact upon the labour market, the marriage loan scheme was primarily an instrument of family policy; and it is to this topic that the discussion must now turn.

## Procreation

Marriage loans were made available from the summer of I933. They were one of the most ingenious pieces of social engineering which the regime devised. The scheme was also National Socialism's only major innovation in the field of family and population policy, for most of the other steps it was to take had already been tried by other European governments. Under the terms of the scheme young couples were granted an interest-free loan of 6oo RM (average), provided that the woman withdrew from the labour market.54 This sum amounted to between 4 and 5 months' wages for most industrial workers, and repayment w drawn out over a long period-I% per month. Some 700,000 couples, that is over one quarter of those who married in the period, passed the various tests o economic eligibility and political and eugenic reliability between August I933 and January I937. Loan certificates-made over, typically, to the husband rather than to the wife-entitled the bearer to acquire household equipment and furniture, and the scheme thus gave a considerable stimulus to these depressed sectors of industry. A clause under which the sum to be repaid was cut by one quarter for every child born to the couple, was designed to encourage procreation, and nazi propagandists attached great importance to the success which they claimed for the scheme in this respect: it was asserted that couples who received marriage loans had on average twice as many children as those who, for one reason or another, did not qualify. Even if allowance is made for the fact that applicants were probably more likely to want to start a family than nonapplicants, and that some of the women who benefited were pregnant when they married, the marriage loans constituted the only significant exception to the general rule that financial incentives (or disincentives) had no demonstrable effect upon the birth-rate in Europe in the inter-war years.55 The scheme was financed in the first instance by the tax on the unmarried, but this propagandistic device was soon dropped on account of the resentment which it caused among working spinsters, who were not reluctant to marry but could find no partner, because of the slaughter of young men in the First World War.

The political gains for the regime from the introduction of marriage loans were probably considerable. Known opponents of National Socialism will not have been impressed by it, since they were excluded from its benefits, but there can be little doubt that for numerous young couples, whose political views had hitherto been characterized by uncertainty or abstinence, the early stages of married life were made a great deal less hard than they would otherwise have been. The poverty and insecurity of the crisis years had caused many people to defer marriage. The provision of marriage loans for working and lower middle-class couples certainly played a part in bringing about an extra-ordinary increase in the number of marriages after the nazi seizure of power-

I929: 589,600; I932: 5I6,8oo; I933: 638,600; 1934; 740,200.

The marriage rate declined a littl years it remained well above the average for the I920S.56 The new regime thus associated itself closely with an unprecedented outbreak of domestic bliss and appeared to be making good some of its campaign rhetoric about restoring the integrity of the family, giving women an assured and tolerable place within the home, and safeguarding the demographic basis of the German race.

This latter point loomed of course very large in official thinking on these topics: the simultaneous assertion that Germany needed living space because the country was over-populated, and that the race was threatened with extinction because of the declining birth-rate, furnished one of the most extreme examples of that "brutal casuistry", to use Bullock's phrase, which characterized both nationalist and nazi political thinking on these questions. Prior to 1933 the German birth-rate had indeed declined very sharply:

from over 2 million live births at the turn of the century to IP3 million in 1925 and to 97I,000 in I933.

Since there were many more women of child-bearing age in the population in I933 than before World War I, mean fertility had in fact fallen even more steeply:

from 128 live births per I,OOO women aged I5 tO 50 in i9iI oIi, to 8o in I925 and to 59 in I933.57

This was a long-term trend common to all West European countries. It resulted in the main from the increased accessibility of reliable methods of contraception, and the desire of a rapidly expanding urban population for higher standards of living in towns the restriction of family size made a decisive difference to living standards. In Germany the Great War, the post-war inflation and then the world economic crisis, all of which had a more severe impact here than elsewhere, greatly accentuated this downward trend; in I930 only Austria had a lower reproduction rate. ,8

Marriage loans were only one of the many instruments deployed by the nazi regime in a massive campaign to reverse the fall in the birth-rate, and this campaign was in turn one of the major influences upon the social position of women in the Third Reich. Richard and Kathleen Titmuss described the campaign as 'the most tremendous experiment ever attempted consciously to change biological trends'."' Financial inducements and compensation were an important part of the experiment, but it also comprised improvements in welfare and maternity services, an unending barrage of propaganda designed to elevate the status and raise the self-respect of mothers and housewives, and repressive measures against birth control and abortion. The experiment was conducted blindly, for there was no prior evidence that any of these interventions would in fact cause the birth-rate to rise.

By the beginning of World War II the cumulative economic effects of welfare reforms in the interests of families with children were considerable. Though the diversity of the measures makes it impossible to compute average financial benefits, the strain on the family budgets of many households-especially of poor urban households-must have been very substantially eased. In October I934 the income tax allowances for every dependent child were roughly doubled, and voluntary payments by employers to women workers on marriage were freed from

tax (provided that the recipient gave up her job). Further tax legislation in I938/39 extended the allowances and exemptions. These reforms made a substantial difference to family incomes. Maternity benefits for working mot introduced during the First World War and codified in 1927, were generally increased after I933, especially for the period of 4-6 weeks before confinement; there were no significant changes in the law on these questions before 1942 but the Labour Front brought strong pressure to bear upon employers, and in the increasingly rare cases where they refused to increase the benefits the National Socialists Welfare Organization often stepped in. Such payments were also exempted from taxation.'I On marrying working women were allowed to claim back 50% of the contributions they had paid into the compulsory state invalidity insurance scheme. The rights of working mothers and of the parents of large families to benefits under the sickness insurance scheme were extende and nursing payments were introduced together with periods of paid leave of absence from work for those with infants to care for. School fees were reduce for families with more than one child at school.

The most important reform was undoubtedly the introduction of family allowances. These were made available by stages and in two different forms. As a measure of relief rather than an incentive, large families which were in need became eligible in September I935 for once-and-for-all grants of up to IOO RM per child. Preference was given under this discretionary scheme to families with more than five children: by March I938 56o,ooo families had received grants averaging 330 RM (=3 million children at an average of 62 RM per head). Very few families of the prescribed size failed to benefit; indeed some of the money must have gone to households in which the eldest children were no longer dependent. It can be safely assumed that this measure was of particular importance to the rural areas, where, as nazi ideologues never tired of pointing out, th procreative urge was still stronger than in the cities. (In rural areas, it must also be noted, a much smaller proportion of the population was covered by social insurance than in the towns.) The second type of family allowance, the recurrent grant, was inaugurated on a modest scale, but the government soon made it almost universal. It was additional to and did not supplant to once-and-for-all grants. From July I936 IO RM per month was paid for the fifth and every further child under i6 years of wage- and salary-earners whose income did not exceed i85 RM per month; this earnings limit was well above the average industrial wage in I936, but it excluded some two-thirds of all white-collar workers from the benefits. Fifteen months later the self-employed were made eligible and the income limit was raised to 200 RM per month. The selfemployed were however excluded from the decisive further reform of April I938, which raised the income limit for wage- and salary-earners to 650 RM, and granted rO RM per month for the third and fourth, 20 RM for all subsequent children. The number of children covered by these monthly payments rose from 300,000 in 1936 tO 2-5 million in I938. Public employees-workers and clerks, but not the higher ranks of the civil service-were eligible, although they already received salary increments in respect of some of their children. The money was drawn from the national unemployment insurance fimd, which had accumulated a large surplus since I934.61

These more or less general measures to lighten the economic burdens of

larger families were supplemented by a wide and intricate range of specific discretionary programmes, designed and financed by both government authorities and party and professional organizations, also by industrial firms and the social insurance offices. Their individual impact was slight but taken together they added up to a further noteworthy reinforcement of welfare facilities. In the later I930S the size of the average marriage loan rose by 5o RM, and specially advantageous terms were offered to couples who earned their living from agriculture, also to women who worked as auxiliary nurses or social workers -these groups were evidently thought to be likely to produce large or model families. From March I938 allowances were available for the education or vocational training of politically reliable teen-age children from large families. The parents of large families paid subscriptions at reduced rates to nazi organisadons (most notably in the Labour Front, membership of which was virtually compulsory), and they could buy cheap railway tickets for themselves and their offspring. A number of cities followed the example of Berlin, where the birthrate was exceptionally low, and offered generous children's allowances to couples who would agree to have a third child; and the professional organizations of doctors and dentists followed that of the federation of pharmacists and set up income equalization schemes for the benefit of members with numerous children. The National Socialist Welfare Organization, the Winter Relief programme and the specialist organization 'Mother and Child' all laid great stress upon the relief in kind and cash which they distributed to large families. The latter, a voluntary organization employing over I20,000 full-time or honorary officials and assistants, set up a comprehensive network of 26,000 agencies, which claimed to have given economic assistance to I-2 million needy families and aid and advice to over 6oo,ooo expectant mothers (one in two) during the year I935 alone; holidays were arranged for mothers and children who would otherwise have been unable to get away from home, kindergartens set up in agricultural districts during harvest-time, etc., etc.62

The Labour Front exerted especially strong pressure for such improvements in welfare policies. This mass organization developed a well-founded scepticism about the capacity of the regime to enforce sacrifices in the interests of rearmament, and a firm, if opportunistic, concern for family incomes and the standard of living of the working population. Unlike other issues on which it pressed for concessions-e.g. wage rates, hours of work, food prices-the issue of welfare reforms for mothers and children appears to have been relatively uncontentious. The economic and political elite groups were unaminously committed to the goal of population growth and, having accepted the goal, they had to reconcile themselves to what appeared to be the necessary means to achieve it, despite the fact that the cost, in terms of the diversion of resources to non-military purposes, was considerable. Given the peculiar institutional and ideological limits within which discussion about financial priorities was possible in the governmental system of the Third Reich, it is immediately obvious that the demand for family allowances etc. should have been irresistible, while open demands for higher wage-rates were ruled out-although in economic terms the effects of the two concessions would have been very similar. Family policy and eugenics furnished the propagandistic frame work within which the problem of poverty could be taken up by this regime. Or, to put it another way, in Germany as in most

West European countries it was the forces took possession of the crucial issue of fa and ideological ramifications. It was a stra ance. By contrast, in Britain the question of family allowances was integrated into the Labour Party's programme of social democratic reforms and largely dissociated after the First World War from the debate about eugenics and the imperial master race.

Taken together, the new measures certainly fell far short of that general equalization of burdens as between large and small families which had long been called for by demographers, parents' associations, racialist ideologues and political leaders of all parties, and in terms of cost-benefit calculations they provided only a very small compensation for the loss of income and the expense involved in starting a family. Small families, noted Glass, 'have a substantially higher standard of life than large families', and he cited calculations made in England in the I930S, according to which a working-class family with three children cost 66% more to run than a man-and-wife household.63 The new benefits conferred by the nazi regime on a three-child family did not come remotely near to 66% of the average wage. Even if notional values for discretionary benefits which not all families received-such as cheap transport, lower school fees and the nonrepayment of marriage loans-are added on to family allowances and income tax reductions, it is difficult to see how this figure could have been higher than 20o%.64 But this must not obscure the fact that the reforms did yield in direct cash terms a clear improvement in the economic situation of millions of households, thus lightening the oppressive burden of trying to make ends meet week by week. It was usually wives who had the responsibility of managing the family budget, and in the mid-I930s the margin between debt, hunger and cold on the one hand, and being able to buy the occasional Sunday joint, new shoes or a bottle of beer on the other, was still desperately narrow for most working-class families-every Pfennig counted.f65

These economic measures were accompanied by incessant propaganda and by a variety of organizational innovations, all of which were designed to further the realization of the official ideal of womanhood and to improve the 'professional aptitudes' of mothers and housewives. Only the briefest summary of these developments is possible here.66 Central importance was attached of course to everything associated with pregnancy and birth, and the encouragement of procreation was a major element, though not the only one, in this exercise in dictatorial persuasion. The National League of Large Families, an influential organization founded during the First World War which had 300,000 members and its own periodical, received official recognition and was brought under the direction of the Race Policy Office of the Nazi Party. The number of maternity clinics was increased, and both infant and maternal mortality rates continued to fall steadily from their already comparatively low levels-this, despite the weakening of the medical services caused by the persecution of the many Jewish doctors.67 Changes in the law also played an important part in stereotyping women's social role. From I936 infertility among married women was categorized as an illness and could thus be treated free of charge under the sickness insurance scheme, and in I938 wilful or premature infertility was declared to be grounds for divorce. However, since the regime was as much interested in the 'racial-biological quality'

as in the sheer quantity of children born, laws concermng the sterilization of those with serious hereditary ailments and the enforcement of eugenic tests on those intending to marry were progressively tightened from 1933 tO I935. This legislation resulted in numerous personal tragedies, but far more numerous were the potentially flattering notifications to aspiring parents that they were of sound biological stock.

Secure in this knowledge, pregnant women could then graduate to the Mothers' School, which formed one of the most striking institutional innovations in this sphere. The schools were run on a voluntary basis and offered training courses in the arts and sciences of motherhood and household management which evidently met a real need, for, although a small fee was charged, they were attended in the mid-i93os by roughly one-third of all pregnant women-such at least was the claim of the organizers. For their part, they tried to convey the high political and social calling of the housewife and mother, stressed the crucial nature of her contribution to the future health and strength of the race, gave instruction in hygiene and baby-care, and pointed out the ways in which a shrewd and careful management of the family budget could help to ease the economic problems of the Reich, in particular the pressing shortage of foreign exchangebuying fish instead of meat, synthetic fats instead of butter, and clothes made from artificial fibres; cooking nutritious simple dishes etc. Less obviously marked by ulterior political motives and highly realistic in view of the straitened circumstances of most households in the 1930s, was the consistent emphasis on thrift and the avoidance of waste in managing family resources: here too a potentially flattering concordance was suggested between the interests of the individual household and those of the national economy, and the everyday actions of each housewife assumed strategic importance. Women could contribute directly to the prosperity and strength of the Reich. National attention was focussed regularly upon the family kitchen by the propaganda institution of the 'One-PotSunday' when a single-course meal was to be eaten as a token of solidarity with those living in poverty.68

The essential burden of this campaign was the development of a comprehensive alternative to the emancipation of women. The effort was directed at inducing women to celebrate their domestic role as mother and housewife, on account of its allegedly supreme importance in the life of the nation. The status and characteristic life-patterns of women were not to be changed, but a systematic attempt was made to change their perception of this status: drudgery, scrimping and saving, anxiety, self-abnegation and the highly constricted perspective of a life revolving around the household remained, but they were now hallowed by a never-ending stream of compliments from the country's political leaders, attended to by an ever-growing phalanx of governmental and party organizations, endowed with the greatest possible general public significance, and, in the case of the rigours of child-birth, translated through a frenetic vocabulary of adulation into an ideological experience worthy of quasi-religious reverence. The machinery of propaganda and welfare administration appeared to take the probl of married women seriously, and this was to a large degree novel. Specious, insulting, mendacious and wildly overdrawn though a great deal of this attention may have been, the campaign to ennoble the natural and the every-day, allied as it was to a series of financial compensations, addressed itself to and fed uponz

some of the real frustrations of married women. The Mother's Cross in gold (eight children), silver (six) and bronze (four),69 the innumerable pictures of the Fuhrer posing with young children, were merely among the more memorable excesses of a reactionary programme, which was, in view of the conservative self-image of many German women and in view of the unattractive character of most employment opportunities for women outside the home, very shrewdly conceived. It was also most energetically prosecuted. But was it successful?

One admittedly uncertain measure of the appeal of this brand of women's politics is furnished by the strength of the organizations which carried out most of the helping, advising, schooling, relieving, holiday planning and propagandizing of women and children. These were run by women, and if the official claim that the Frauenwerk, the umbrella organization, had between 6 million and 8 million members, was even remotely accurate, it was already in the mid-I93os the largest non-compulsory organization in the Third Reich. The 'elite' organization, the Frauenschaft, itself claimed 2 million members, few of whom were also in the party. One of the magazines which it sponsored enjoyed a circulation of over 700,000.70 While a great deal remains to be discovered, about the recruitment, structure, activities and power of these women's organizations, one thing is clear: they offered a wide and politically unexceptionable framework for responsible public activity, on an honorific part-time or a paid full-time basis to a large number of women with the requisite skills and disposition. Women were not entirely eliminated from public life under nazi rule, rather their role was confined to the relatively broad sphere of what the party leadership considered to be specifically women's affairs. The element of surrogate emancipation involved in encouraging some women to run classes for other women in hygiene baby-care, toy-making and domestic science is unmistakeable.71 Though hard evidence is still lacking, it is probable that the nazi women's organizations bore a basic resemblance in their social composition and functions to those organizations in late Victorian England, which were dominated by educated upper- and middle-class women with time and energy to spare, women who felt called upon to bring poor families up to bourgeois standards of self-reliance, thrift and cleanliness.72 It is not easy to imagine working-class wives or the wives of peasant farmers playing an active role in the Frauenschaft on any large scale (though this assumption could well be mistaken); that they played an extensive passive role seems to be beyond doubt.

Precisely in this context it is important to emphasize that nazi eugenic propaganda was populist rather than exclusive or elitist in tone. The principles of selection invoked were racial and medical rather than social. The upper-class German nationalist stress on the threatening failure of the educated ruling groups to reproduce themselves was overlaid after 1933 by considerations relating to the health and strength of the German race as a whole: all children were welcome, provided that they did not suffer from hereditary defects and were 'racially pure'. Parents' class became a matter of indifference, indeed the low birth-rate of the professional classes served to illustrate their obsolescence as a ruling elite. The nazi political elite portrayed itself by contrast as a new leadership group, springing direct and supposedly classless from out of the healthy vigorous people, superseding the incompetent and sterile caste of bourgeois nationalists. It betrayed no outward sign of feeling threatened by 'the people'

and went to great rhetorical len sphere of family and population policy social darwinism thus seemed to be overshadowed by a pseudo-egalitarian racial darwinism, which identified the enemy as being outside 'the people'. The potential appeal of this kind of doctrine was much greater than that of the more exclusive variants current in Europe during the age of high imperialism before I914. The regime spoke to all German citizens (as defined by the Nuremberg Race Laws of I935). Only to the smallest degree was this propaganda stance matched by real changes in the social order, but this does not mean that it was ineffective.73

The increase in the birth-rate after I933 seems to offer a surer measure of the popularity of the regime's policies towards women and the family than that of th membership, activities and ideology of the women's organisations. In absolute terms the number of live births rose from its lowest point of 97I,000 in 1933 to I 2 million in I934, and continued to rise almost without a break to I 4I million in I939. Expressed in terms of births per I,OOO women of child-bearing age, the increase was only a little less dramatic:

## -I933: 58-9; I936: 77.4; I939: 84 8.

Richard and Kathleen Titmuss commented, 'Germany alone in the world has succeeded in obtaining some increase in fertility. This is a spectacular fact when viewed against the background of the trend in other countries peopled by whites .. .'7 Aside from the marriage loan scheme however-and this only to a certain extent-none of the regime's positive policies for the encouragement of motherhood can be demonstrated in a methodologically conclusive manner to have played any part in bringing about this result. This is not only due to the great intricacy of the science of demography and to the large role played therein by unquantifiable aspects of human behaviour. On a more mundane level, both hostile and impartial observers agreed in attaching great weight to the effects upon the birth-rate of attempts to suppress the practice of illegal abortion: the legal penalties were increased in May I933, and the law was more rigorously enforced under the nazis than before, with the result that convictions increased from 5,072 in 1934 to 7,670 in I938. Furthermore, information about and devices for birth control were made less accessible after 1933, though they were not placed under legal restrictions.75

It would be out of place in more than one sense to offer any judgment here upon the debate about the causes of the increase in the German birth-rate after I933. I am not competent to do so, those who are competent remain undecided,76 and the issue is anyway of only secondary relevance to the argument of this paper (though it would clearly be very relevant if the birth-rate had in fact continued to fall, as it did in France and Italy where similar efforts were made to encourage procreation). The important fact in this context is that there were substantially more children and that this access of domesticity was welcomed and assisted by the regime, both factors combining to reinforce the official definition of the social status of women. Yet some remarks on the controversy are called for, since certain aspects of it do relate to the general social conditions of women's life and to important patterns of women's behaviour.

Aside from the effects of stressing deterrent measures against abortion, demographers and social historians who are sceptical about the impact of the

government's policies and propaganda make evidence. First, although it is indisputable that cantly after. I933, it still remained below the av the long term trend was reversed, for the avera crisis years I926-I930, but not decisively. A c it is argued, was no more than a return to ' economic crisis had been overcome; mass une always depress the birth-rate in advanced indus recovery of Germany after I933 was on its ow of the increase in the birth-rate. Second, the f after the nazi seizure of power was considerabl married in the I92os:

-of the couples who married in I929 and were still together at the end of I934, 25.9% had remained childless in this period and 36.4% had had one child; for those married in I933 and still together in December I938, the corresponding figures were 33 I%and 26 9%.

Couples who married after I933 continued to conform to this pattern of starting their families a little later in their married lives and of keeping them a little smaller.77 This difference is the more striking when one recalls that the period I929-I934 was marked by acute economic crisis and unemployment which depressed the birth-rate. A considerable part of the rise in the birth-rate up until I939 was thus due to the continued, perhaps increased fertility of marriages entered upon in the I920S and the early I930s. The government acknowledged this fact by introducing in February I939 special penal tax rates (40% above the standard rate) for couples who remained childless after five years of marriage. This was a most significant measure. Nearly 620,000 of the couples who married between I929 and I933 had had no children by I939-that was just over 20%. Hundreds of thousands of other couples who married before I929 were also eligible to pay the new tax.78 Coming shortly after the police round-up of back-street abortionists, the measure indicates that the government was still anxious about the birth-rate.

Third, the effects of nazi policies were magnified by one other long-term trend, which had been underestimated by the prophets of demographic doom in the I920S and which tended to cancel out in part the ineluctably growing preference for smaller families: throughout the inter-war years a steadily growing proportion of the population of marriageable age actually did marry. In I938/39 the overall proportion was around 6% higher than it had been in i9io0/9ii. This figure seems small, yet 6% of the population aged over 20 in I939 amounted to 2'83 million persons-almost 4I million married couples. What is more, the average age of women on marriage was steadily falling. 79 Thus there were more married couples, and married couples were more likely to have children than single people: despite a variety of changes in the law and in taxation policy which eased the lot of unmarried mothers, the number of children born out of wedlock was much lower after I933 than it had been in the ig20s.80

Considered in conjunction with the partial suppression of abortion, these comments seem to indicate that the massive rhetorical, institutional and financial encouragement of motherhood in Nazi Germany had little impact on people's

behaviour. Such a conclusion would, however, be premature, for it is also necessary to consider those conditions of life in the country during the I930S which might have been expected, all other things being equal, to depress the birth-rate-for if they did so, their effects were compensated for by other factors. At least six points must be noted in this context. First, the demographic effects of emigration, murders, executions and imprisonment may have been minimal before the war began-terror must be on a massive scale to effect population trends-but the continual political uncertainty and fear among the many who remained opposed to the regime must have had adverse consequences for their family life. (And perhaps at least a few women were so sickened by the blatantly instrumental biological romanticism of nazi fertility propaganda, that they decided to have no children!) There is more than polemical point to this consideration, for the government repeatedly cited the rising birth-rate as evidence of popular confidence in National Socialist policies in general, as proof of the re-birth of the nation. By the same token, it must be noted that the police terror and the open drive to prepare for war can scarcely have acted as an encouragement to the many opponents of the regime, whether jews, christians, social democrats or communists, to start families. Whether or not to bring children into this world must have been a very difficult decision for those who rejected Nazism.8' Second, owing to the effects of the First World War, the number of women who entered child-bearing age after I935 was unusually small, and this fact was widely expected beforehand to reduce the total number of births very sharply.82 Of greater general importance, third, was the relationship between living standards and size of family. The real incomes of many German workers continued to fall until I936 on account of price increases for foodstuffs and clothes, and in that year about one-third of the working class (those employed in the consumer goods and service sectors which were at first left on one side by the armaments boom) was still living in much the same poverty which had been the major cause of the sharp fall in the birth-rate during the world economic crisis.83 The living standards of the majority of workers did improve quite rapidly after I934, yet a Labour Front newspaper which invited readers' letters on the theme 'reluctance to have a third child', was told in no uncertain terms by many of its correspondents that they simply could not afford it." The welfare measures outlined above, together with the accelerated increase in real incomes after I936 weakened these constraints somewhat, but the improvement in living standards was largely confined to consumption and did not touch one problem which was most relevant to patterns of marriage and family limitation: housebuilding, fourth, did not remotely keep pace with the rate of which new households were founded in the I930s, because the government concentrated both the necessary financial resources and the capacities of the building industry on the re-armament programmes. The ministry responsible estimated that there was a deficit of Iv million dwellings in I939. Rents for new homes (th not for those built before I914) were high. These problems were widely acknowledged to be causing great difficulties for young married couples in the main urban and industrial centres, delaying both marriage and the decision to have children.85 By simultaneously encouraging people to marry and breed and failing to provide them with homes, the regime furnished a clear measure of its inhumanity, clear evidence too of the economic contradictions on which its

policy rested. Fifth, a further self-impose was the introduction in I935/36 of compulsory labour and military service for young men. This appears to have slowed down quite markedly the general trend towards earlier marriage among men, because conscripts earned very little during their total of two-and-a-half years service and thus needed longer to save up in order to found a household.86 Finally, it can probably be assumed that the development to be considered in the second part of this paper, the increase in women's employment from I936 on, also had a slight tendency to depress the birth-rate. The obstacles in the way of the increase in the birth-rate were thus neither few nor small-and yet it did rise.

The argument about the weight which should be attached to these various considerations cannot be resolved here. The questions involved are complex and encrusted with ideological thesis and counter-thesis. Thus nazi writers went to great lengths actually to minimize the effects of the regime's individua measures, so that as large a part as possible of the increase in the birth-rate could be attributed to the 'psychic re-birth of the nation', to the supposed restoration of national self-confidence and unity of purpose.87 The problems of interpretation can be set into clearer focus if Germany is compared with other similar countries. The much more protracted attempts to raise the birth-rate in Italy and France in the inter-war years remained completely unsuccessful,88 while in Britain, whose governments took no steps whatever to encourage population growth and whose official delegate at the International Congress of Demographers in Berlin in August I935 defiantly announced that small families were a fine thing since these small islands were anyway overcrowded,89 the marriage rate rose significantly from I933 and the birth-rate slightly from I934 on.90 What grounds can there be for arguing that the German measures had any effect?

The main reason concerns the monolithic and comprehensive nature of the effort in Germany. Whereas in France the government remained in the background until I938/39, paying for a wide range of decentralized incentive and relief schemes but leaving propaganda to private associations and tolerating various forms of counter-propaganda and activity,91 and whereas in Italy there were strict financial limits on the scale of government intervention, the nazi regime was altogether more systematic: it drew fully on its great resources of dictatorial power and influence over the German people. By the late 1930S exhortations, deterrents, partial compensations and obstacles in the way of nonconformist behaviour had been orchestrated into a massive campaign of manipula tion. People are not infinitely manipulable, but if the factors which inhibited the continued rise in the birth-rate after I933 are given full weight, the changes which occurred in these pre-war years perhaps regain something of their remarkable character.92 If the seriousness of the nazi claims to have changed people's attitudes towards parenthood-and therewith to have effected a partial re-definition of women's self-image and behaviour-is not fully borne out, it perhaps appears at least worthy of careful discussion and further research. Some further light can be thrown on the issue by a brief consideration of women's work.

[To be concluded in the next number of the journal]

## GUIDE TO ABBREVIATIONS AND REFERENCES

In the footnotes below, works and sources referred to only once or twice are cited in full on the first occasion. Those referred to frequently are abbreviated throughout as follows:

BRIDENTHAL, 'Weimar Women'-Renate Bridenthal, 'Beyond Kinder, Kirche, Kiiche:

Weimar Women at Work', Central European History, vol. 6, no. 2, I973. BURGDmRFER, Volk-Friedrich Burgddrfer, Volk ohne Jugend. Geburtenschwund und alterung des deutschen Volkskorpers, Beiheft Nr. 9 der Zeitschrift fur Geopolitik, 2nd Berlin I934.

DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik-Deutsche Sozialpolitik, Bericht der Deutschen Arbeitsfront, Zentralbiuro, Sozialamt, 30 June I936 tO 3I Aug. I937, and I Jan. tO 3I Dec. I938, 2 vols. Berlin 1937, 1939. (The Labour Front was the party organization of all workers and employers; its main task was to further the cause of class harmony.)

EVANS, 'German Women'-Richard J. Evans, 'German Women and the Triumph of Hitler', Journal of Modern History, vol. 48, no. I, March I976 (reader-demand, microfilm edition). GLASS, Population Policies-D. V. Glass, Population Policies and Movements in Europe, Oxford 1940 (reprinted, 1967).

KIRKPATRICK, Women and Family Life-Clifford Kirkpatrick, Nazi Germany: Its Women and Family Life, Indianapolis/New York, 1938.

MCINTYRE, 'Professions'-Jill McIntyre, 'Women and the Professions in Germany, I9301940', in Anthony Nicholls and Erich Matthias (eds.), German Democracy and the Triumph of Hitler, London I97r.

MASON, thesis-Timothy W. Mason, 'National Socialist Policies towards the German Working Classes, 1925-I939', D.Phil. thesis, Oxford 197I.

MASON, Arbeiterklasse-Timothy W. Mason, Arbeiterklasse und Volksgemeinschaft. Dokumente und Materialien zur deutschen Arbeiterpolitik 1936-1939, Opladen 1975.

PRELLER, Sozialpolitik-Ludwig Preller, Sozialpolitik in der Weimarer Republik, Stuttgart 1949.

RGBI-Reichsgesetzblatt (German Statute Book, annual).

Stat. Hdb.,-Statistisches Handbuch von Deutschland 1928-i944, herausgegeben vom Landerrat des Amerikanischen Besatzungsgebiets, Munich 1949.

Stat. \_hb.-Statistisches Jahrbuch fifr das Deutsche Reich, herausgegeben vom Statistischen Reichsamt. (Official annual compilation of statistics, published in Berlin till I942; biennial, I939/4o and 1941/42).

SdR-Statistik des Deutsches Reichs, herausgegeben vom Statistischen Reichsamt.

- (Comprehensive series of detailed official statistical publications.) STEPHESON, thesis-Jill Stephenson (n6e McIntyre), 'Women in German Society 19301940', Ph.D. thesis, Edinburgh 1974.
- TH63NNEssEN, Emancipation-Werner Th6nnessen, The Emancipation of Women. The Rise and Fall of the Women's Movement in German Social Democracy, I863-1933, London I973. TITMUSS, Parents Revolt-Richard and Kathleen Titmuss, Parents Revolt. A Study of the declining Birth-Rate in acquisitive Societies, London 1942.
- l This essay started life as a paper at the two Ruskin History Workshops on Women inl History in 1973. Whatever merits it may have in its present form are due in large measure to the discussions at the Workshops and to the constructive criticism of numerous friends and colleagues, in particular to the unstinting assistance of Jill Stephenson, University of Edinburgh.
- 2Max Domarus, Hitler, Reden und Proklamationen, Munich I965, p. 450.
- ' I have used the typescript version, Edinburgh 1974. The book appeared after this article was completed: Women in Nazi Society, London 1975. D6rte Winkler-Schnurr, Trier/Freiburg, i. Br. is preparing a detailed study of women industrial workers in the year I933-1945. Helen Boak, Manchester, is writing a thesis on the position of women in S.W. Germany during the world economic crisis. Louise Willmot, Somerville Coll., Oxford, is investigating the organization of adolescent girls within the Hitler Youth. All of them have given me helpful advice and references.
- 4 Some of the weaknesses of this paper and some of the openings for further research will be discussed in the concluding notes at the end of part II.
- 6 For example Wilhelm Reich, The Mass Psychology of Fascism, Harmondsworth I975, (first published in Denmark in 1933), and the as yet untranslated writings of Max Horkheimer, Erich Fromm, Herbert Marcuse and other members of the Frankfurt School, Studien iiber

Autoritat und Familie, Paris I936. Paul A. Robinson, The Sexual Radicals, London 1970, and Martin Jay, The Dialectical Imagi-nation, Boston/Toronto I973, ch. 4, give good summaries and discussions of the theoretical issues.

- 8 Richard M. Titmuss, Essays on 'The Welfare State', London I958, 6th edn. I966, ch. 5 and 6, gives a brilliant introductory survey of this theme. Figures from Stat. Jhb. 1941/42, p. 25; widowed and divorced persons are counted as having married. The high birth-rate in the late Igth century, its decline thereafter and the consequent shift in the age-structure of the population after I9I8 meant that the change appeared even more marked than it anyway was: the proportion of the whole population who were married rose from 416% to 53-9% between I910 and I939-figures which tell us little about the marriage rate, but a great deal about the changing shape of the society.
- I Stat. Jhb. 1934, pp. I2, 26. A very small number of women married before they were 20. The difference between the proportion of women and of men who were actually married was due in the main to the fact that women tended to live longer than men. Over this whole period there were thus always more widows than widowers, and their numbers continued to increase to 3-2 million in I939 (pre-war): Stat. Jhb. 1941/42, p. 25.
- 8 See comments on the I939 census in part II of this article, and Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', pp. I49-5I. This point is often missed, for example by Jurgen Reulecke, 'Veranderungen des Arbeitskraftepotentials im Deutschen Reich I900-I933', in Hans Mommsen, Dietmar Petzina and Bernd Weisbrod, eds., Industrielles System und politische Entwicklung in der Weimarer Republik, Dusseldorf I974, pp. go f. Although Bridenthal's reading of the statistical evidence is in places hard to follow and her conclusion is both abrup and contestable, her article is a really valuable contribution to our understanding of the subject. I have gained much from her argument and in some respects am trying to carry it forward through the 1930S.
- 9 These and the following figures are taken or computed from Stat. Jhb. 1934, p. I2, and Stat. Hdb., pp. 32 f. There were in fact rather fewer than I3 million housewives in the strictest sense of that vague term, since the figure includes many aged women with no dependents, and some women who in fact worked as family assistants but were not categorize as such.
- 10 Burgd6rfer, Volk., p. 6i.
- 11 Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', pp. I5I f. This situation was transformed by t armaments boom of the later I930s-the men then wanted to leave: see part II.
- 12 Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', p. I53; Preller, Sozialpolitik, p. I20. There was a brief increase in the number of female proprietors during the world economic crisis.
- 13 Bridenthal's figures for domestic outworkers are too low: 'Weimar Women', p. i6o. Compare Stat. Hdb., pp. 480 f.
- 14 Judith Grunfeld. 'Rationalisation and the Employment and Wages of Women in Germany', Internat. Labour Review, vol. XXIX, no. 5, May I934, esp. pp. 6I2-31.
- 15 Griinfeld also makes some interesting comments on this point. See further Preller, Sozialpolitik, pp. I30-8: Robert A. Brady, The Rationalization Movement in German Industry, Berkeley I933. The above figures for women in non-manual employment includes civil servants (mostly teachers) who were not counted as a separate category until the 1933 census: Stat. Hdb., p. 33; Preller, Sozialpolitik, pp. I32 f.
- 16 The statistical evidence on these groups is incomplete and imprecise, but the overall upward trend of women's employment in them is clear. A majority of the women categorized as civil servants were school-teachers. See Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', p. I64; Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, p. 249; McIntyre, 'Professions', p. 2oo; Michael Kater, 'Krisis des Framenstudiums in der Weimarer Republik', in Vierteljahrschrift far Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, vol. 59, I972, pp. 207-55; Jill Stephenson, 'Girls' Higher Education in Germany in the 1930s', in Journal of Contemporary History, vol. I0, no. i, Jan. I975, pp. 41-69. Under the terms of a retrenchment decree in force from I923 tO I929 women civil servants were eligible for compulsory retirement-I am grateful to Jane Caplan, Newnham College, Cambridge, for this point.
- 17 Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', p. I64; McIntyre, 'Professions', pp. 178, 20I.
- 18 The number of women teachers must be estimated, since the official statistics do not distinguish the sex of some 58,ooo teachers in a variety of private and vocational schools: Stat. Jhb. Z934, pp. 528 ff.; Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', p. I63. On nurses, see Bridenthal, p. I64; DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik I936-37, p. 2I5.
- "' In the late summer of I929 there were 7.5 million women in insured employment, but the real increase since I925 was about i million, since I-5 million women workers were brought into the sickness insurance scheme for the first time in Oct. I927, through a change in the regulations: Stat. Jhb. Z926, p. 294; 1928, p. 376; 1929, p. 270; 1930, p. 3I2.
- ao Even if the British statistics were wildly inaccurate, the contrast with Germany would remain very sharp. For this point, and many other suggestive remarks, see the bold article

by Eric Richards, 'Women in the British Economy since about I700: an Interpretation', in History, vol. 59, no. I97, Oct. I974, p. 349. There were still a large number of peasant holdings in France in the inter-war years, and the development of women's employment in agriculture there was more similar to that in Germany: Evelyne Sullerot, 'Condition de la Femme', in Alfred Sauvy, Histoire economique de la France entre les deux guerres, vol. 3, Paris I972, p. 42I.

- 21 At this point, the temptation to refer to Christopher Isherwood's Berlin novels must be resisted! See instead Burgdorfer, Volk, pp. 32-8,95 f.; Stat. Jhb. 1934, p. 50; R. R. Kuczynski, Childless Marriages, London, n.d. (I939?-pamphlet reprint of three articles from The Sociological Review, vol. xxx, I938), pp. 45-9; Glass, Population Policies, pp. 278 ff. On reactionary hostility to the growth of cities see Harold Poor, 'City versus Country: Urban Change and Development in the Weimar Republic', in Mommsen, Petzina, Weisbrod, eds., Industrielles System., pp. III-127; Klaus Bergmann, Agrarromantik und Grobstadtfeindschaft Meisenheim a. Glan I970.
- 22 Talcott Parsons, Essays in Sociological Theory, Glencoe, I954, 'Democracy and Social Structure in Pre-Nazi Germany.' It is noteworthy that this is the only idea in this littleread essay by Parsons that Ralf Dahrendorf does not try to develop at length in his Society and Democracy in Germany, London I968. See also Evans, 'German Women', on the attitudes of the women's organisations.
- 23 The following figures in the text are an attempt to provide a substitute for an index of changes in the mean size of families since the I890S-I have not been able to find the appropriate series. Burgdorfer estimated it at approximately 2-6 children per married woman in I927, 2 Iin I93I: Volk, pp. i8, 65. John E. Knodel, The Decline in Fertility in Germany, 1871-1939, Princeton I974, pp. 12I ff., shows that it varied between 3 and 6-2 in different parts of the country and in different classes at the turn of the century.
- 24 This calculation of course exaggerates the fall in family size, since those who married after I929 would not have had time to have four children by 1933.
- 25 Sources: Stat. Jhb. 1934, p. 26; 1936, pp. 7, II, I3, 28-34; Burgdorfer, Volk, pp. I7 f., 53 ff.; SdR, vol. 470/I, p. 20. The problem with using household size as an index is that these figures include non-family members-lodgers, domestic servants, journeymen, apprentices and agricultural labourers who lived in. In I939 over 2 million households contained one, and over ioo,ooo two or more non-family members. These figures are given here in an inexact form because the source refers to Germany within the boundaries of mid1939: Stat. Jhb. 1941/42, p. 29. See also the highly positive correlation between family size and the amount of land owned by a family, calculated on the basis of the I933 census: SdR, vol. 470/I, p. I8. The marriage rate among professional middle-class people was much lower than that of the rural and working-class populations. Class and urban/rural distinctions were not the only source of variation in family size-in most parts of the country Roman Catholic families still tended to be larger than Lutheran or Jewish families: Burgd6rfer, Volk, pp. 45 ff.
- 26 I owe this perspective to the work of Raphael Samuel on changing patterns of family life in nineteenth-century England. See also Richards, 'Women', in History, Oct. 1974.
- " Preller, Sozialpolitik, p. I2I; Burgdorfer, Volk, p. 209.
- 28 These incomplete and rather general comments are based on Glass, Population Policies, pp. 27I-92; Preller, Sozialpolitik, pp. 353 f.; and Th6nnessen, Emancipation, ch. 6 and 7. Thonnessen, pp. 9I f., also emphasizes the indifference of the male leaders of the Social Democratic Party and the Trade Unions to equality of employment opportunities for women in the months after the revolution and the armistice, I9I8-I9I9. Evans, 'German Women', emphasizes the lack of enthusiasm of all major political parties, except the Communist Party, for further emancipatory legislation after I9I9.

29 Burgdorfer, Volk, pp. 30, 36 f., 66-9, 72 f., I40, 143, 429. This book, first published in 1932, was just one (probably the most comprehensive) in a stream of similar works which the author produced in the inter-war years. It is sanctimoniously dedicated to 'My dear wife, the mother of my children'. Unlike some lesser colleagues, he did not push his irrational doctrines to their ultimate inhuman political conclusion: he pointed out in 1936 that war was bad for racial hygiene, peace essential to the goal of population growth and breeding, but this was a logical, not a self-consciously political judgement, quite at odds with the whole drift of his earlier argument. In Volk he repeatedly makes, in a purely decorative manner, and presumably in order to protect his scholarly reputation, the crucial distinction between substantive predictions in demography and statistical projections of existing trends, but he gives great space in his analysis to the projections, all of which were intensely gloomy. Even today demographers are almost completely unable to predict accurately, a point made at that time by Glass, Population Policies, ch. VIII, which is a model of caution, modesty and rigour. With the exception of many British writers, demographers in the inter-war years appear to furnish a further example of the way in which professional groups have used

nationalism and imperialism as vehicles for advanci ments of the 1929S and I930S had already been worke propaganda before and during the Great War: Glas and Motherhood' (typescript).

- 30 These prejudices and interests were not uniform or socially homogeneous. For evidence that working-class men resented the fact that middle-class women were contributing too little to the war effort in I940-42, see Heinz Boberach (ed.), Meldungen aus dem Reich, Neuwied/Berlin I965.
- 31 I know of no investigation of the role of women in the various resistance movement it would be very difficult to carry out, but worth doing. Some working-class women were active in communist and social democratic resistance groups, not many; the wives and female supporters of the conservative and military groups appear to have played hardly any active role at all. In this, as in so many respects, the so-called Red Orchestra (a communist group led by a senior civil servant and an airforce officer) was the exception which proves the rule. There are some indications that older women who had clear memories of the First World War were much less enthusiastic about the regime and its wars than younger women. The Gestapo regarded Roman Catholic women as a distinct source of support for parish priests during the 'Church Struggle'; the opposition of the Lutheran Confessing Church seems on the other hand to have been carried by men. Some biographical materials on resistance by women have been edited by Gerda Zom and Gertrud Meyer, Frauen gegen Hitler. Berichte aus dem Widerstand 1933-1945, Frankfurt a. M. I974.
- 32 This major programmatic speech at the start of the war was made to an audience of Berlin armaments workers: extracts in Mason, Arbeiterklasse, doc. I74.
- 33 Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, Book I, ch. xi.
- 3" Stat. Hdb., p. 32. On men's efforts to restrict women's access to white-colar employments see Griinfeld, 'Rationalization', in Internat. Labour Rev., May 1934, pp. 6I3 ff.; and p. 92 of this paper.
- "5 On the attitudes of the economically independent, see Jeremy Noakes, The Nazi Party in Lower Saxony 1921-1933. London 197I; Heinrich August Winkler, Mittelstand Demokratie und Nationalsozialismus. Die politische Entwicklung von Handwerk und Kleinhandel in der Weimarer Republik, K6ln 1972; Martin Schumacher, Mittelstandsfront und Republik. Die Wirtschaftspartei-Reichspartei des deutschen Mittelstandes I919-1933, Dusseldorf 1972; Annette Leppert-F6gen, Die deklassierte Klasse, Studien zur Geschichte und Ideologie des Kleinbuirgertums, Frankfurt a.M. I974. Only ch. III/3 of this last work attempts a systematic discussion of the relationship between family structure and political ideology in this social class, but the author has very little source material to back up her marxist-freudian theories. The other works cited contain passing references to anti-feminism. Further research is urgently needed. It seems possible, for example, that anti-feminism was of especially great political importance in the industrial areas of Saxony and Thuringia, which were the only such areas in which nazism seems to have gained a significant degree of working-class support. This was a poor region, with a large number of small and middlesized enterprises and, on account of the textiles industry, a high rate of women's employment. The birth-rate was also abnormally low.
- 3' Toni Sender, The Autobiography of a German Rebel, London i940, pp. 280-3. The early chapters of this book on Toni Sender's childhood and her work in the international socialist movement up to I919 are also of great interest. On the social psychology of antifeminism, see Hans Dieter Schmidt and others, Frauenfeindlichkeit. Sozialpsychologische Aspekte der Misogynie, Munich 1973.
- "7 David Schoenbaum, Hitler's Social Revolution. Class and Status in Nazi Germany 1933-1939, New York i966, p. I87.
- Il See Parsons, 'Democracy and Social Structure'; Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, ch. 2; Thonnessen, Emancipation. On the background to the role of the liberal women's organizations: Richard J. Evans, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894-1933, Londo 1976, cb. 8; and Evans, 'German Women'.
- 39 Gabriele Bremme, Die politische Rolle der Frau in Deutschland. Eine Untersuchung fiber den Einfluss der Frauen bei Wahlen und ihre Teilnahme in Partei und Parliament, G6ttingen I956, pp. 73-7; Th6nnessen, Emancipation, pp. io8-i6. The Communist Party received very little electoral support from women, less than any other party.
- 40 See the interesting, partly autobiographical book by Katherine Thomas, Women in Nazi Germany, London 1943. The solid electoral support among women for the revanchist German National People's Party in the I920S however, points to the limits of this reaction against militarism: Bremme, Rolle der Frau, pp. 68-73.
- *" Bremme, Rolle der Frau, p. 74. The statistical evidence on this point is very fragmentary, since by no means all local and regional authorities made a separate count of men's and women's votes: Herbert Kiihr, Pdrteien und Wahler im Stadt- und Landkreis Essen in

- der Zeit der Weimarer Republik, Dusseldorf I973, pp. 289 f. The fact that the communist and nazi parties appealed predominantly to male voters does not invalidate the view that the head of the household customarily set the political tone for his wife, since these parties were supported above all by young men in the towns and the countryside respectively-many of them were unmarried.
- 42 Karl Dietrich Bracher, Die Auflosung der Weimarer Republik, 3rd. edn., Villingen I960, p. 476, n. I32. (Compare Kirkpatrick, Women and Family, p. I56, on the relative popularity of Hindenburg and Hitler as godfathers to the children of large families!) Dahrendorf is probably the most influential author who still insists, despite the evidence, that women voted in disproportionately large numbers for the nazi party: Society and Democracy, p. i I6; the point is not discussed in the earlier German edition of the book. Bridenthal's formulation, 'Weimar Women', pp. I49, I69 f., is more cautious but still misleading-the change in women's political attitudes seems to have come after 1933.
- "Quoted in Glass, Population Policies, p. 282.
- "Stat. Jhb. 1929, pp. 270, 274; 1934, pp. 297, 307.
- 45 Jill Stephenson, thesis, pp. I23 ff., identifies the source of the illusion, but underestimates its importance as also does David Schoenbaum, Social Revolution, p. I90. The only way to calculate the fall in the number of working women in the crisis is to compare totals of employed and unemployed, since this reveals the extent of what was called 'invisible unemployment'. Expressed as a proportion of those in the labour market in I929, the total of registered and 'invisible' unemployed women in Jan. I933 was slightly lower than that of men: 3-6 out of 7.9 million, as against 7 out of I4 2 million. But the conclusion that women came better out of the crisis is entirely unwarranted, since most of those without work also received no relief. See Preller, Sozialpolitik, p. I20.
- "' According to this notion goods, services and rights should be allocated according to ability, and-deriving from this-just need, rather than according to the principle of formal equality. Aristotle regarded women as innately inferior to men, as subordinate members of the family household. He set a very long tradition of discrimmatory political theory on its methodological feet.
- 47 See Stephenson, thesis, ch. 3, and 'Higher Education', in Jnl. Contempt. Hist., Jan. I975; McIntyre, 'Professions', p. I92, Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, p. 232. In 1939 only 6-2% of women civil servants were married: SdR, vol. 556/2, p. 4. The loss of valuable racial stock in the shape of I40,ooo highly educated unmarried women (mostly school-teachers) does not appear to have bothered eugenist opinion!-perhaps keeping senior jobs a male preserve appeared more important. Public employees have always been in the front line of governments' attempts to influence the birth-rate and family patterns: they were the first to receive family allowances in most European states, and, in the case of women, the first to be pushed around in periods of retrenchment. Married women found it very difficult to gain work as school-teachers in Britain in the I930s, and in the late I930S the French government tried to make promotion for senior male civil servants dependent on their being married. Glass, Population Policies, cites much evidence on this point.
- 48 For details see Mason, thesis, ch. IVa. The establishment of political control over the labour market at a time of mass unemployment marked a decisive step in the breaking of opposition to nazi rule. Aside from communists and social democrats (who were sacked in large numbers) and women, the other most exposed group were young unmarried men; however they were not expected to give up jobs unless there was some alternative for them, such as work on land reclamation in the Labour Service. It must be noted in this context that women had been selectively dismissed in large numbers in a previous crisis-during demobilization at the end of World War I, then too with governmental support: Thonne Emancipation, pp. gi ff.
- 49 See Wirtschaft und Statistik, vol. 2I no. 3. Feb. 194I, p. 50; Preller, Sozialpol p. I2I. In absolute terms the number of economically active married women increased by 530,000 between I925 and I933, an increase of one seventh. The proportion of married women who were economically active rose in the same period from 28.7.%' to 29-20,,. It was the unmarried and the widows who were being forced out of economic life.
- 50 Not even the sharp fall in the rate of marriage during the crisis years held back the trend towards the increased employment of married women.
- 51 Wirtschaft und Statistik, I94I, p. 50; Stat. Jhb. 1939/40, pp. 376 f. I have not yet found separate figures for married women salary-earners, but it is unlikely that the increase in the number of economically active married women was concentrated among white-collar workers, since these women tended to give up their work on marriage anyway-see part II of this article. They were also subject to greater pressure to leave their jobs.
- 52 A few big firms did offer women workers redundancy payments and replaced them b men; one of the firms immediately reduced wage-rates: Glass, Population Policies, p. 460. The notion that some types of industrial work are essentially women's jobs, calling for

<!-- image -->

The original caption of this propaganda photograph reads as follows: 'i,200 women workers from a big industrial firm get married. 1,200 jobs are made vacant for male workers.' It was taken somedme before the end of 1934 and was intended to popularize the marriage loan scheme. It has not been possible to verify whether such a mass wedding in fact took place. Wiener Library

By I940, when this photograph was published, there were no unemployed men to take women's jobs, and the propagandist's camera had to seek out new targets. Wiener Library

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

above:

Women agricultural workers during the asparagus harvest at Beelitz, near Berlin.

Radio Times Hulton Picture Library

right:

Fashionable area of Berlin on a sunny day in June 1939.

Radio Times Hulton Picture Library

<!-- image -->

This content downloaded from GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;45.80.32.238 on Wed, 15 Jan 2025 15:25:59 UTCGLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt;GLYPH&lt;0&gt; All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

especial dexterity, patience etc., is generally an ideological rationalization of social and economic interests, shared in a complicated manner by employers and male workers. In this situation it may actually have helped to save some women's jobs-a superficially paradoxical outcome.

- sa Stat. Hdb., p. 474.
- rW4Women whose husbands were earning less than I25 RM per month did not have to give up their jobs at once-this was a low wage for a man, though in I933/34 there were certainly many workers earning even less. For this and further details, see Glass, Population Policies, pp. 287-9; also Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, ch. V and VI; DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik 1936-37, pp. 59 f. The scheme gave rise to a new verb in the German language: abkindern-to repay-a-loan-by-having-children. The marriage loan scheme was not in fact associated with any systematic effort to place men in women's jobs; the government claimed that it was, but this was just another attempt to curry favour among men. Its main effect on the labour market probably lay in causing a higher turnover than usual among young women workers-an effect which was of no small importance, in view of the fact that the large cohort of children born immediately after the First World War was leaving school in the years I933-I936. There were thus more teenage girls seeking employment, and the marriage loan scheme tended to produce more openings for them by removing young women from clerical and factory employment.
- 5 Titmuss, Parents Revolt, p. iii, made this generalization. Glass points out that the loans may well have furnished poor couples with a real alternative to abortion or illegitimate birth, and that the recipients came from lower income groups among whom the birth-rate was anyway higher than average. Furthermore, at the beginning some loans were granted to couples who were already married. He none the less inclines to the view that the loans did have some effect on the marriage- and birth-rates: Population Policies, pp. 308, 46I.
- 56 Stat. Hdb., p. 47. Full details of marriage rates by age-group: Stat.Jhb. Z941/42, p. 73. The economic recovery was of course the major cause of the increase, which occurred in most other European countries too, though it was greatest in Germany.
- 57 Stat. Jhb. 1934, p. 27; 1941/42, p. 77. There are a variety of different methods of computing birth-rates and fertility. The most simple index has been chosen here. The more sophisticated calculations-net reproduction rates-are mainly of predictive value, and require evidence which was not always gathered in full in pre-I945 censuses. They do yield slightly, but not significantly, different rates of change in fertility from the crude figures quoted above. Robert R. Kuczynski, The Measurement of Population Growth, Methods and Results, London I935, gives a helpful discussion of these problems. This study contains much statistical evidence from Germany and many other countries, together with a devastating critique of the ways in which such figures and calculations were misused in the I920S by panic-mongers and imperialist procreation zealots. See also Glass (who acknowledges his debt to Kuczynski), Population Policies, pp. 9-I4, 270, 305. Knodel, Decline of Fertility, gives a detailed and highly technical account of the causes and course of the fall in the birth-rate.
- "8 Burgd6rfer, Volk. p. 372. The author also rehearses the long, inconclusive discussion among German demographers about the exact extent of the effect of the war on the change in the birth-rate during the I920S; Burgdorfer himself claimed that it was slight: pp. 77-8I, IOI-7.
- 59 Titmuss, Parents Revolt, p. io5, Similarly Kirkpatrick, Women a The following highly condensed account of the further welfare measures is based on Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life; DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik 1936-37 and Z938; Glass, Population Policies; Schoenbaum, Social Revolution, ch. VI.
- 60 The Law of I927 on paid leave for pregnant women was the major reform: RGBI. I, p. I87; Preller, Sozialpolitik, pp. 353 f.; Friedrich Syrup, Hundert Jahre Staatliche Sozialpolitik, Stuttgart 1957, p. 362. Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, pp. 226-9, exaggerates the extent of the further govemmental reforms in this sphere after 1933. The promised Law for the Protection of Mothers was held up by disputes within the government in I937/39 and did not reach the statute book until May I942: RGBI. I, pp. 32I-8. On paper this act did substantially extend protective restrictions and benefits for pregnant women workers, but it is not clear that the new regulations were fully enforced during the crisis of the war. On reforms by industrial employers in the 1930s, see DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik, z938, p. 5i.
- 61 Glass's account, Population Policies, pp. 29I-6, gives slightly different figures from DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik, 1938, pp. I82-4. In 1941 public employees were put on the same footing as civil servants and received 20 RM per month for each child. I am grateful to Jane Caplan for this point.
- 62 Details from Glass, Population Policies, pp. 293-303; Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, ch. VI; DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik 1938, p. 215.
- 63 Glass, Population Policies, pp. 371, 206. For more detailed present-day calculations, see Margaret Wynn, Family Policy, 2nd edn., Harmondsworth 1972, esp. ch. 5 and appendix I.

- "4 For comparison, in France, after the reforms of I938 which put a cash premium on mothers staying at home, family allowances alone amounted to more than this in many regions of the country: Glass, Population Policies, pp. 120-3, 206 ff.
- 66 Mason, thesis, ch. IVb, presents some of the data on household budgets in the I930s. Up to I937 working-class expenditure on such 'non-essentials' as writing materials, travel, entertainment was minimal.
- "6 I again draw heavily in the following section on Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life; also Glass, Population Policies, pp. 272 f, 286, 303.
- 7 Benefits and allowances probably had very little effect on the birth-rate, but by making it possible for parents to improve standards of care and nutrition they may have helped to cut infant mortality rates.
- 66 Ernest K. Bramsted, Goebbels and ANational Socialist Propaganda I925-I945, London I965, pp. I02 f.
- 9 The first awards were made in May I939, probably in direct emulation of Frarnce, where similar crosses had been distributed since I920: Glass, Population Policies, pp. I72, 303. Among the mothers so honoured were probably some who had tried and failed to obtain an illegal abortion-this had been made much more difficult since 1933: Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, p. I69.
- 70 See Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, ch. 3.
- 71 Many women functionaries pushed beyond the limits of this surrogate emanicpation after I933, and got into conflicts with the party hierarchy for their pains. They were not always unsuccessful: Schoenbaum, Social Revolution, cb. VI; McIntyre, 'Women and the Professions'.
- 7 See Brian Harrison, 'For Church, Queen and Country: The Girls' Friendly Society I874-I920', in Past and Present, no. 6i, Nov. I973; also C. L. Mowat, The Charity Organization Society I869-I913, London I96I, ch. II.
- 78 On changes in the social structure, see Schoenbaum, Social Revolution, ch. VIII. Frick, quoted above on middle-class birth-rates, belonged to the conservative-nationalist wing of the nazi party.
- 7 Stat. Jhb. Z94I/42, p. 77; Parents Revolt, p. io8.
- 76 Stat. Hdb., p. 635. Glass, Population Policies, pp. 284-6, 458 f., gives the fullest account of these points. Kirkpatrick, Women and Family Life, pp. i6o f, was written before the major police drive against illegal abortion took place. Bridenthal, 'Weimar Women', p. I50, n. 20, is mistaken on the law concerning contraceptives, only the display and advertisement of which was restricted. Reliable evidence on the extent of illegal abortion does not exist. Some German clinics noted a decline in the number of what they took to be selfinduced miscarriages after 1933, but the effects of the campaign against abortion cannot be calculated with any degree of accuracy. The suppression of abortion not only increases the number of live births in direct proportion, but also reduces subsequent sterility resulting from the operation being carried out in a crude way.
- 76 Again, Glass offers by far the most sober assessment of the various explanations: Population Policies, pp. 307-I2.
- 7Stat. Hdb., pp. 54 f.; Stat. Jhb. 1936, pp. 36, 44; Titmuss, Parents Revolt, p. I09. A slight change in the methods of compiling these figures made the difference between the two groups appear a little bigger than it in fact was.
- 76 DAF, Deutsche Sozialpolitik 1938, p. I74; Glass, Population Policies, p. 30I; Stat. Jhb. 1941/42, p. 74.
- " Stat. Hdb., pp. 28, 47, 5I; Stat. 7hb. 1936, p. 4o; and 194I/42, p. 25.
- 80 Just over ioo,ooo illegitimate children were born each year, 1933-1939, that i 8% of all births. This was one-third less than the average for the I920S. The numbers began to increase again in I938 and 1939: Stat. Hdb., p. 47.
- 61 I have no evidence on this point yet. However, the birth-rate clearly is influenced by changes in political circumstances: the number of births began to fall in Britain in the latter half of I939, probably as a result of the Munich crisis. A very large proportion of the German people were unenthusiastic about the nazi regime.
- 82 Figures will be given in the second part of this article.
- I' Details in Mason, thesis, ch. IVb. Women workers were strongly concentrated in these sectors of industry; insofar as they lived with parents or husbands, the effect of the stagnation or fall of their real earnings on family budgets was mitigated by the increase in men's earnings. This question will be discussed in more detail in the second part of this article.
- 64 Agrff, 2 Feb.-2 March I937.
- Minute by Minister of Labour, 2 March 1939: BA Koblenz, R 43 II, file II7I; report on economic conditions in Berlin in the last quarter of 1938, Mason, Arbeiterklasse, doc. I5I; Glass, Population Policies, p. 302.

- 86 Figures on the marriage rate for men aged 2I tO 2 P.73-
- 87 IWhile he takes the component parts of this corrupt analytical skill, Glass does allow it a residual plausibility-national aggrandizement and military victories evidently can help to raise the birth-rate: Population Pol:cies, pp. 307-12.
- 88 Of course it may well be that French and Italian policies did arrest the rate of decline; this too cannot be proved.
- 89 Address by Close, reprinted in Hans Harmsen and Franz Lohse, eds., Bevilkerungsfragen. Bericht des Internationalen Kongresses fair Bev6lkerungswissenschaft, Munich 1936, PP. 93-8.
- 90 B. R. Mitchell and Phyllis Deane, Abstract of British Historical Statistics, 2nd edn., Cambridge 1971, pp. 30, 46.
- I" French pro-natalist ideology and policies were on the whole conservative and defensive in tone, and lacked the imperialist racial-darwinist edge characteristic of Nazism. In I938/39, however, the government became both more aggressive and more anti-feminist, as the catalogue of previous failures in population policies grew longer and as the German threat loomed larger: Glass, Population Policies, pp. I20-3, 2I3 ff.

92 Some of these inhibiting factors were, of course, also at work in France and Italy too, but most of them were less marked than in Germany; and in Italy the birth-rate was declining from what had been a comparatively high level in the early I9208. Perhaps one last speculation might be permitted here: there is some inconclusive evidence that in this century generations tend to react as adults against the circumstances and conventions of their own childhood. It may not be altogether far-fetched to suggest that those in their 20s and 305 in the Germany of the 1930S were rejecting by their own preference for marriage, family, privacy and the home the exceptionally turbulent and insecure experience of their and their parents' life in the years of war and revolution, I9I4-I923. The narrow security of the clear division of sexual roles within the family perhaps appears most desirable to those who never really knew it as children, constricting and repressive to those who knew nothing else.

## Visiting London?

Compendium Books has a vast selection of fugitive literature from the socialist, feminist and underground press. Books, pamphlets and periodicals imported from all over the world.

Catalogues available: sexual politics, drama, music, science fiction.

Catalogues in preparation: sexual politics (updated), politics, history, music (updated).

## COMPENDIUM BOOKS

240 CAMDEN HIGH STREET LONDON NW1

Tel. 01-485 8944