## African-American Migration and Mechanized Cotton Harvesting; 1950-1960*

## CRAIG HEINICKE

Baldwin-Wallace College

Previous studies have forwarded cotton harvest mechanization as major explanation of African-American outmigration from the rural South between 1950 and 1960. The paper investigates this hypothesis and finds that the effect has been overstated\_ In order to link previous estimates of migration to displacement by mechanization, an estimate is made of the number of cotton acres upon which mechanized harvesting would have been profitable in 1959 of the number of African-Americans harvesting that acreage. It is found that about one-fourth of 1994 Academic and

## 1.INTRODUCTION

In the 1960s urban riots brought the plight of inner-city America to nationwide attention . For African-Americans , urban rebellion was response to unacceptable conditions including police brutality and pervasive impoverishment. Urban poverty in turn resulted from discrimination and low skill levels that blocked many African-Americans from high-paying occupations.   Urbanization of the African-American population before 1960 is largely attributed to the "Great Migration' from the rural South. More than 1' million African-Americans , comprising about 299 of the rural South's African-American population in 1950, migrated from the rural South to urban areas during the decade preceding the 1960s.

Scholars have ascribed this   migration to both and short-term causes\_ The argument that the mechanical cotton harvester constituted

- The author is indebted to R A Berry, Loren Brandt, Susan Horton James Irwin, Sandra Peart, Gavin Wright, this journal's editor, and anonymous referees for comments on drafts from which this paper was drawn. Thanks are due to the College of William and Mary for computer services and to Mark Heinicke for graphics . errors are the author's Any
- The 1950s were preceded by several decades of African-American net migration from the rural South; only in the 1940s was African-American outmigration from the rural South greater than in the 1950s (Price\_ 1969 P. 39).

the major short-term cause of the massive African-American outmigration in the 1950s is widely accepted. Since African-Americans were disproportionately employed in agriculture and cotton harvesting was among the most labor-intensive operations , harvest mechanization in the 1950s is said to have caused unemployment and outmigration for many AfricanAmericans in the rural South\_ The attractiveness of this hypothesis derives in part from the timing of the mechanical harvester's adoption in relation to African-American outmigration. Mass production, marketing, and adoption of the mechanical cotton harvester began in 1948. Largescale migration of African-Americans from the rural South occurred in the 1950s, well after the upward shock in northern labor demand experienced during World War II had abated and when northern urban labor markets appeared unreceptive to migrants (Wright, 1986, Pp. 245-246). living

Mechanical cotton harvesting and its relationship t0 African-American migration entail broader historical implications as well, as the mechanical picker was part of a modernization process in southern agriculture that transformed the region from the "Old" to the "New South . Unresolved questions surround that   process . Relative to the North, the South was plagued by rural poverty for the century following the Civil War. years before southern agriculture became modernized, experts argued that pervasive poverty in the rural South was caused by overpopulation of rural  areas (Fite, 1984, PP. 210-220) . Did mechanization in agriculture exacerbate the impoverished conditions associated with southern ture , as Davis and Donaldson argue (1975, p. 54), and can we conclude that mechanization proceeded rapidly' (see 1967)? Certainly contemporaries  feared the adverse effects of mechanization . The Rust brothers, who developed an early version of the mechanical picker, were concerned about the possibility of widespread displacement of agricultural workers (Street, 1957)\_ Many agricul'too Day ,

The implications extend to the nature of the southern labor market and the institutional character of the South. In his investigation of the southern black teenage labor market, the cotton harvester as the most important   technological  change, Cogan (1982) found that   technological citing

- Before 1950, approximately two- to three-fifths of the labor hours per acre for cotton agriculture were devoted to hand harvesting the crop (USDA, 1944) .
- Within American popular culture and historiography,  also, there is preoccupation with adverse effects of technology on traditional subcultures, most powerfully portrayed in Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath. (For a historical investigation of the importance of technology to the changing culture of region, see Kirby, 1987.)
- According to Wright, "there was a distinct transitional phase between the war and the 1960s, and this period completing the mechanization of the cotton harvest was the dominant regional development' (1986, P. 241). Although he differs on the causes of the invention of the cotton picker , Alston agrees that the it was "the proximate cause of the transformation of the Old to the New South (1987, P. 65). during

change in agriculture explained one-half of the decline in the black teenage employment-to-population ratio from 1950 to 1970 (p. 627). Regarding southern political economy, Alston and Ferrie (1993) have argued that the rapid mechanization in the 1950s was instrumental in the decline in southern paternalism (p. 16).

To improve assessments concerning the of southern development, as well as the major causes of southern rural poverty, one must first identify as precisely as possible the influence of the mechanical picker on African-American outmigration from the South. For if the introduction of the mechanical cotton harvester displaced most of those African-Americans who migrated to northern cities in the 1950s, this might lead one to ask whether another path of development might have ensued in the South after World War II that would have affected African-Americans differently (Counterfactual questions are raised in Cogan, 1982; 1967; Wright, 1987.)8 Alternatively, if the introduction of the mechanical cotton picker explains small portion of African-American migration, a larger role can be attributed to better opportunities in northern cities , the role of previous migrants , and other explanations of migration in the 1950s. Further, if African-Americans were drawn to better opportunities in the North (as opposed to pushed out of the South) southern employers might have been increasingly willing to accede to the demands of the Civil  Rights movement, as a means of increasing the relative attractiveness of the South, affecting both the rural and the urban South . path Day , being being

Among the most forceful arguments that cotton harvest mechanization was central to the southern outmigration of African-Americans in the 1950s is that made by Fusfeld and Bates. According to those authors:

workers to mere fraction of the 1949 level; this was true for corn as   well as cotton. The post-1949 second stage of the out of agriculture via complete mechanization, broke the connection between cotton raising and the large cotton belt black population. A big labor force was no longer needed; hundreds of thousands of African-American farm families were now economically obsolete, displaced push

by the mechanized cotton picker. The cotton belt economy no longer required the labor services of most black farm workers , tenants, and wage workers alike. (1984, pp. 64-65).

Johnson Fifties: the Relocation of Black America" that 'more than the tractor , mechanical cotton pickers had a severe impact on the agricultural South' (p. 141). Gavin Wright also emphasizes the role of the cotton picker, as well as cutbacks in cotton acreage throughout the South, as principal causes of outmigration during the 19SOs (1987, P. 171). According to Wright, "with the successful breakthrough in mechanical cotton harvestthe character of the labor market radically changed in the 1950s from 'shortage' to 'surplus' 243). In addition, 'displaced tenant farmers poured into the cities in the 1950s, despite the fact that job prospects 10 were no longer favorable, particularly for blacks' (p. 246). ing,

Given the   repeated   emphasis on the importance of the mechanical cotton harvester to migration and southern agriculture , as well as the large weight attached to the cotton harvester as a cause of African-American migration in the 1950s by Fusfeld and Bates, Wright, Johnson and Campbell, and others, it may be surprising that no precise estimate has been made of how many African-American migrants were displaced by the cotton harvester during the 1950s. This paper makes an estimate of the influence of the cotton harvester on African-American migration, by computing an upper bound estimate of the proportion of migration that resulted directly from the adoption of the mechanical cotton picker. (An upper bound is computed because of the large weight attached to this

The authors saw important implications: 'Most of the migrants in the 1950s were utterly unprepared for big city life, while the cities were unprepared for the massive black inmigration ' (Fusfeld and Bates, P. 65). This the 1940s: "The 'pull' migration of the prosperous   1940s, however, was smaller in magnitude  than the migration that agricultural displacement produced in the 1950s (p. 65). 'push

This does not exhaust the list of authors who maintain that cotton harvest mechanization was an important cause of African-American outmigration in the 1950s; see Beale (1971 P (1967 who focused on the Mississippi  Delta.  Dillingham Sly (1966) provide evidence from the Delta of Arkansas that mechanization displaced African-American workers Fite acknowledges   that cotton harvest mechanization was largely   confined to the Mississippi Delta in the 1950s (although he cites a case of harvesters on large scale in Alabama) (1980, P. 204). Without focusing on African-Americans or the 1950s, Peterson and Kislev to the mechanical cotton harvester in migration; for critique , see Whatley (1987, 1991). Daniel (1985) notes the importance of the cotton picker in the 1950s and argues of earlier mechanization that it is not always possible to determine whether mechanization caused outmigration, or migration responded to other causes (p. 242). Day and region

determinant in the literature ) It is found that the effect, although important, has been overstated in the literature

The paper demonstrates, first, that the displacement by cotton harvest mechanization  explanation applies mainly to three states of the cotton South (Arkansas, Louisiana,  and Mississippi) in the period 1950-1960. Second, it is shown by means of numerical estimate that even within these states, cotton harvest mechanization displacement directly accounted for only part of African-American outmigration, since mechanization was concentrated in the Mississippi Delta. This measurement allows an upper bound of the direct effect of cotton harvest mechanization on African American migration to be calculated.

## 2. PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON COTTON HARVEST MECHANIZATION

Two methods of estimating the number of African-American migrants who would have been displaced by the harvester are considered in this section. A first   approximation of the proportion of African-American migrants who were displaced by the cotton harvester is obtained by assuming that all the African-Americans migrating from the three states of Arkansas , Louisiana, and Mississippi were displaced by the cotton har vester, since data published by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) reveal that  cotton harvest   mechanization was   limited mainly to these three states before 1960 (see Table 1). By the year 1959, 36, 50, and 389 of the cotton crop was harvested by machine in Arkansas, Louisiana,  and Mississippi   (often referred to as the wDelta" states in USDA publications) . But by 1959 the level of mechanization did not exceed 8% in any other state except Texas, and in most states the level 12 was considerably below 89 (the rate reached in Tennessee in 1959) . Since the Census was enumerated in the spring of 1960, 1959 was the last year for which harvest mechanization would have been relevant to 1950 1960 migration.

Net migration from the three states of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi amounted to about 566,000 African-Americans from 1950 to 1960. Net   migration from the Secessionist South states   (Florida  excepted) amounted to about 1,583,000 African-Americans. 13 Thus, at most about 36% [(566,000/1,583,000) X 100] of the African-Americans   migrating

- Some authors have argued that mechanization also displaced African-Americans in the 1960s The paper does not attempt to estimate those effects\_
- Mechanization of the harvest in was dominated by the mechanical stripper, rather than the spindle picker. In 1959, 449 of the cotton in Texas was harvested by machine but 349 by the mechanical stripper Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide 1976-77). The stripper was used in the western part of the state (see Street , 1957, PP165-69, 224-225) , where few African-Americans lived Texas
- Estimates from United States Bureau of the (1975 , Series C 25-75) . Census

TABLE Percentage of Cotton Harvested Mechanically , by State

|      | Delta states'   | Delta states'   | Delta states'   | Non-Delta states   | Non-Delta states   | Non-Delta states   | Non-Delta states   | Non-Delta states   | Non-Delta states   | Non-Delta states   |
|------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Year | AR              | LA              | MI              | AL                 | GA                 | NC                 | SC                 | TN                 | TX                 | VA                 |
| 1949 |                 |                 | 4               |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 1950 | 1               | 3               |                 |                    |                    |                    |                    |                    | 1                  |                    |
| 1951 | 2               | 13              |                 |                    | 2                  |                    | 3                  |                    |                    |                    |
| 1952 | 2               |                 |                 |                    | 3                  | 1                  |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 1953 |                 | 28              |                 | 3                  | 6                  | 3                  |                    |                    |                    |                    |
|      | 19              |                 |                 | 2                  |                    |                    |                    | 1                  |                    |                    |
| 1955 | 25              | 28              |                 | 2                  | 3                  | 2                  | 2                  | 2                  |                    |                    |
| 1956 | 27              |                 | 25              | 3                  | 2                  | 3                  |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| 1957 | 16              | 35              |                 | 2                  | 2                  |                    | 4                  | 4                  |                    |                    |
| 1958 |                 | 43              | 19              | 1                  | 2                  |                    | 1                  | 4                  | 35                 |                    |
| 1959 | 36              | 50              | 38              | 6                  | 4                  | 5                  |                    | 8                  | 44                 |                    |
| 1960 | 42              | 49              | 40              | 8                  | 14                 | 12                 | 6                  | 19                 | 58                 |                    |

- The term "Delta states , used in some USDA publications , is given for convenience sissippi lies outside the Mississippi Delta subregion.
- Less than 0.59

Source USDA (1974, P. 218).

would have been directly displaced by cotton harvest mechanization. But this figure is a large overestimate of displacement by the mechanical cotton harvester because not all cotton harvesting in the Delta states was mechanized, and not all African-American migrants from these states were 14 employed in cotton production before migrating ." Thus, a more accurate estimate is developed below

The second method of estimating an upper bound on the percentage of migrants displaced by the cotton harvester is discussed next Only part of each of Arkansas , Louisiana, and Mississippi lies within the Mississippi 15 Delta subregion proper. This estimating procedure accounts for the fact that the share of cotton harvested by machine in the Mississippi Delta

Data do not   exist on the  percentage of the black   population employed in cotton harvesting or cotton agriculture. The percentages of the black labor force reported by the population census employed in all agriculture at the beginning of the period (1950) are 449 for Arkansas 279 for Louisiana, and 559 for Mississippi (calculated from United States were employed in cotton agriculture, the figures show that large   proportion of blacks in the labor force were employed outside of agriculture On the other hand, the figures understate the proportion of families that derived some income from cotton harvesting, since apply to a reference of Population, statistics by state, P. xxi) they

Despite the term Delta states used by the USDA , the Mississippi Delta is a subregion within the states of Arkansas , Louisiana, and Mississippi.

F1G. Percentage of farms operated by African-Americans, 1950. Source: United States Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census (1951) .

<!-- image -->

subregion and the share of African-Americans in the rural population of 16 that subregion were higher than the state-wide shares . Maps of the three states   Figs. 1 and 2) illustrate the concentration of African-Americans and the location of the Mississippi Delta subregion counties. The second method (Sections 3 and 4 below) , estimates the acreage upon which mechanized harvesting was profitable in the three states of Arkansas , Louisiana,

FIG. 2 Source: See Fig. 1.

<!-- image -->

and Mississippi and then the number of African-Americans in the nonDelta parts of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi who would have been displaced by mechanization of the cotton harvest.

## 3.ESTIMATION OF MECHANIZED COTTON ACREAGE

The following steps are taken to provide the upper bound estimate: a method is presented to estimate the number of acres in Arkansas, Louhave been harvested by machine. Section 4 presents   estimates of the number of African-Americans who harvested this cotton acreage . To ensure an upper bound estimate, it is assumed that all of the migrants from the Mississippi Delta subregion were displaced by the cotton harvester ,

and the number from that region is added to the estimated number of those displaced elsewhere.

First, it is assumed that farmers employ the mechanical harvester when it becomes profitable , that is, when the expected cost of machine harvesting is below the expected cost of hand harvesting: To determine where this occurs the concept of the 'break-even level of cotton yields is em18 ployed. At the break-even yield farmers are indifferent between hand or machine harvesting. The variables determining the cost of hand harvesting are the rate of picking and the rate of payment. Cotton pickers were normally piece rate per hundredweight. For mechanical harvesting, the main determinants were variable costs (labor of the operator, repair and maintenance costs, and fuel costs) and fixed costs 19 (depreciation; taxes, insurance, storage, and the interest rate) . using key paid

The first step in the estimation is to determine the cotton acreage outside of the Delta but within Arkansas , Louisiana,  and Mississippi that was harvested by machine. Data on cotton harvesting by machine are not 17 available at the subregion or county level, however. Because these data are not available, the number of cotton acres harvested by machine is estimated given the assumptions outlined below

The yield (output-to-land ratio) of cotton is fundamental to calculating comparative costs of machine and hand harvesting.  The importance of cotton yield derives from the process of machine harvesting: The machinehour-to-land ratio was approximately fixed, since the machine traveled at a speed that varied little over the course of the harvest (see GAES, 1959, 73) . But cotton yields varied across the South. They depended upon soil type, rainfall, temperature, and solar radiation. Since yields varied but the machine-hour-to-land ratio did not, average costs were relatively low where yields were relatively high (the machine-hour-to-output ratio 20 was inversely related to yields) . In contrast, the average costs of hand harvesting were approximately fixed regardless of yields. This difference explains why the cotton harvester was more rapidly  adopted in highcotton-yield areas than elsewhere.

- Authorities at the USDA crop reporting board, the Economic Research Service, the U.SNational Agricultural Library. the regional office of the statistical reporting service of the National Agricultural Statistics Service, and at each of the agricultural experiment stations in the ten southern states were all canvassed . All of these helpful officials maintained that no data are available at the county Or farm level for this with the exception of those published in experiment station bulletins.
- Numerous estimates of these are available (see ArAES , 1960, PP. 11-19; GAES, 1959; SCAES, 1952; MAES, 1950; Maier , 1969).
- Yield refers to the cotton output-to-land ratio, in 500 pound bales of cotton /acre \_
- While the machine-hour-to-output ratio falls as yields rise, this is partially counterbalanced by the fact that the container of the self propelled machine must be emptied of picked cotton more often with high This effect was not enough, however to counteract the effect of higher yields in lowering average costs. yields . large

At a given piece rate for hand picking, and prevailing prices for machine inputs, the analysis above implies that as yields rise average costs for machine harvesting fall, until at a specific yield level they equal the average costs associated with hand harvesting. This is referred to as the "break21 even level of yield. At yields higher than the break-even yield, machine harvesting will be the least-cost method and will be preferred under con22 ditions of certainty . The break-even yield computed by Maier (1969) in 23 his study of cotton harvest   mechanization A different 24 break-even yield level is used for each state

A possible criticism of this procedure is that it does not explicitly con25 sider farm or operating unit size . A substantial literature exists on thresh old farm size and mechanical harvesting methods for various crops and 26 time periods , and some studies of the mechanical cotton harvester during the 1950s did comment on the inverse relation between volume picked per season and average costs (see ArAES, 1960; SCAES, 1952; GAES , 1959; MAES, 1950).27 It is also the case however, that renting\_"custom picking' in the words of contemporaries was practiced, s0 that a farm operator could use the services of a machine without owning it. One study of harvesting machinery in Georgia reported that 18 of the 23 machines for which data were collected were used on a custom basis , as well as on the owner's farm. The average was 36 out of 87 acres picked on a custom 28 basis (GAES, 1959, p. 78) . The Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Sta-

- 21  See Maier 1969) for discussion of this concept \_ The following heavily relies on Maier's dissertation, which provides the method and calculates the break-even yields.
- 23  Maier (1969, P. 135). The calculation of break-even yields uses a weighted average of the different types of machines and also accounts for the effect on the time used to empty containers as a function of yield (see pp. 127-130)
- The inverse relation between yields and average costs was well known to those experimenting with cotton harvesters   and advising southern farmers . See MAES (1948, p. 12), SCAES (1952, pp. 25-26), and GAES (1959, P. 80).
- The values for the break-even yields for 1959 are 403, 469, and 521 pounds for Arkansas , Louisiana, and Mississippi. State averages are used; the data for prices on which are based (wage rates, taxes, etc.) are available for state averages they
- Average fixed costs of machine harvesting decline as acreage increases Thus there is farm size above which farmers will prefer machine to hand harvesting-  Whatley finds that threshold farm size was relevant to tractor adoption in the 1930s (1987\_ PP. 57-61)
- Many of the units referred to in the Agricultural Census were parts of larger ownership units (plantations Or neoplantations) , with centralized management
- were considered farms in the Census, and so ownership units could be enough to justify picker ownership even where farms were small. Data on cotton acreage by ownership unit are not available for 1959. large
- Also, 8 out of 18 pickers were used at distant locations, travelling over 400 miles from the owners' farms, which supports the notion of an active rental market (GAES, 1959, P. 78) . Estimating picker adoption on the basis of ownership size would lead to an underestimate of the number of farms on which mechanical harvesting would be profitable and would thus not ensure an upper bound estimate of displacement .

tion bulletin cited above reported current prices for custom picking, but did not report how widespread custom picking was (ArAES, 1960, p. 24).

If transaction costs of renting were prohibitive and harvesting at least a threshold acreage was necessary before a farm would employ the machine, mechanical harvesting would be observed in areas of large farms and not in areas of small farms. On the other hand, where the farm owner found it cheaper to absorb (at least part of) the transaction costs of renting rather than use hand pickers,  then renting also would be observed in areas of small farms . But even when high transaction costs of renting made ownership attractive, the inverse relation between yields and average costs for machine picking was operative. Thus low cotton yields formed a constraint on the  profitability of mechanical harvesting, regardless of 29 whether the farmer owned or rented the machine \_ To produce an upper bound estimate of the extent of mechanical cotton harvesting, one need not adopt the position that farm size is unimportant. But if we assume that cotton will be harvested by machine on all   acreage where cotton yields are greater than the break-even level, then we will assuredly produce an overestimate which is desired.

One final deserves  consideration: the estimates here determine the acreage upon which mechanical cotton harvesting was the least-cost method , and so a more favorable case is made for the mechanical harvester here than would have been perceived by the potential adopter. This is because the machine method was new, and a given return to the old method (hand harvesting) would be preferred to an equivalent money return to the relatively untested and unpredictable mechanical method. The method here\_ therefore, implies an overestimate of the extent of machine harvesting, which is consistent with the upper bound estimate sought. point

It remains to determine how much cotton acreage in the counties of interest had yields above the break-even level. As noted above, such highyield acreage occurred more frequently in the Delta than elsewhere in Arkansas , Louisiana,  and Mississippi. Average yields were 555 pounds per acre for the Mississippi Delta counties and 339 pounds per acre for counties outside of the Delta but within Arkansas , Louisiana, and Mis30 sissippi\_ Given the higher yields , operators in the Delta would be more likely to from harvest mechanization; but how acres outside the Delta had yields high enough that machine harvesting was the leastcost method? The answer requires knowledge of the distribution of cotton acreage by yield, but only mean yields are available by county. An estimate profit many

of dispersions was made using study (USDA, 1951) which was based on a sample of 624 farms in the Piedmont between 1938 and 1946. The mean yield for the sample was 314 pounds, and the standard deviation was 122 pounds for a combined cross section and time series of farms (p. 14). To make the estimate by county, I assume that the standard deviation that the coefficient 31 of variation is the same for each county . Assuming a normal distribution of acreage by yield, the standard normal distribution was used to compute the probability that an acre of cotton in county produced a yield above 32 the break-even level This probability was multiplied by the total county acreage for the county to estimate the quantity of acreage that produced yields above the break-even and thus to yield the quantity of acreage 33 on which machine harvesting was the least-cost method. The estimated acreage for 1959 was 691,776. point

It is from this cotton-producing acreage that harvest labor would have been displaced. To find the number of persons displaced from this land, an estimate of the hours of employment necessary to harvest that acreage by hand is needed.

## 4. ESTIMATE OF DISPLACEMENT

This section combines the estimate of acreage above the break-even yield level with estimates of the number of African-Americans employed in cotton harvesting and with migration estimates . cotton acreage formerly picked by hand is subsequently  harvested by machine, the individuals  formerly employed migrate from the region Given the number of acres harvested mechanically and the hours of labor necessary to harvest them by hand (on average , 100 hours per bale), the number of families displaced is obtained by dividing estimated total hours by the estimated average hours worked per family ~which is 488.3 hours per family per year. (See the Appendix for an account of how the number of hours per family is obtained.) This number is multiplied by the proportion of farm operators who were African-American in each county to obtain an estimate of African-American families displaced. The result is multiplied by 5.5, the average family size (see MAES, 1960, p. 14), to obtain the total number of African-American persons displaced in each county . Calculations were made for the 163 counties in Arkansas , Lou-

- The standard deviation for each county is assumed to be 38.859 of the mean of the county, or (122/314) x 100, taken from USDA (1951). yield
- The report used the normal distribution for crop insurance (USDA, 1951).
- This ensures an overestimate of number of migrants displaced by mechanization; not all those who lost hand picking income migrated (MAES, 1954, PP. 8, 16-18) .
- established in the study of yield dispersions is that the coefficient of variation was inversely related to county mean yields (USDA, p 25). An estimate was made that relationship, but it did not differ greatly from that above point 1951, using

35 isiana, and Mississippi outside of the Mississippi Delta subregion The result is added to the total number of African-American migrants from the Delta (under the extreme assumption that all migrants from this area were displaced by the cotton harvester) to obtain an upper bound of the total African-Americans   migrating due to displacement   by the cotton harvester .

African-Americans for 1959. The county by county estimates show that majority of them, 184,500 to be exact, would have been displaced from 36 two subregions that bordered on the Mississippi Delta 79,464 AfricanAmericans are estimated to have migrated from those two subregions (see USDA, 1965). Therefore the estimated displaced outmigrants exceed in 37 number the estimated net outmigrants . The remaining number of estimated   displaced came from outside the Mississippi Delta and the bordering subregions; but  within the three states, amounting to 56,343 African-Americans .

We can now complete the estimate of the proportion of southern African-American migrants between 1950 and 1960 who were directly displaced by the mechanical cotton picker. This is done by adding the number along with the number from the bordering subregions (79,464) and adding the number of African-Americans displaced from cotton harvesting in the remainder of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi (56,343) . That yields figure of 380,402 (see Table 2 for a numerical summary of the estimates) \_ or about 24% (380,402/1,583,000 x 100) of the African-American migrants 38 from the South from 1950 to 1960. This is substantial proportion. It reveals , however , that cotton harvest mechanization accounts for a smaller proportion of African-American migration from the rural South than expected, given the   heavy   emphasis it has received in previous commentaries .

We have shown that displacement by the mechanical cotton harvester

- Only counties within subregions which had greater than the national average of nonwhites in the population (9.8% in 1950) were included. Thus some counties with very small African-American populations in Arkansas were omitted.
- The comparison reinforces the claim that an upper bound estimate is made of the effect of the mechanical cotton harvester on African-American outmigration from the South
- The displacement estimates from the two bordering subregions were 112,452 from the Mississippi River Hills (subregion 61) and 72,048 from the Arkansas Prairie and Crowley's Ridge (subregion 75).
- Itshould be reemphasized that is an overestimate of the effect on migration, since it is not assured that mechanization actually occurred in areas   where it would have been profitable, and because not all those displaced migrated. The proportion of cotton acreage on which mechanical harvesting would have been profitable was 769 in the three Delta7 states. These states did not reach that level of mechanization until the 1960s (see USDA, 1974, P

Estimated Displacement by Mechanical Cotton Harvester and Net Migration: Arkansas Louisiana, and Mississippi

TABLE 2

|                                                    | African-American persons                             | African-American persons                               |
|----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Subregion"                                         | (1) Estimated cotton harvest displacement, 1950-1959 | Estimated net migration, African-Americans , 1950-1960 |
| 76                                                 | 244,595                                              |                                                        |
| 61, 75                                             | 184,500                                              |                                                        |
| Arkansas , Louisiana, Mississippi, less rows and 2 | 56,343                                               | 241,3604                                               |

- 61 , Mississippi River Hills; 75 , Arkansas Prairie; 76, Mississippi Delta\_
- Estimated displacement by cotton harvester exceeds estimated net outmigration
- Assuming that all Africa-Americans migrating from the Delta counties were displaced by the cotton harvester (see text)
- Outmigration exceeds estimated displacement by the cotton harvester .

did not account for anything near majority of migration from 1950 to 1960, despite the emphasis on the cotton picker in the literature . Beyond these estimates, we should note that an additional problem exists for the displacement by cotton harvest mechanization   hypothesis as an explanation of migration: rates of African-American outmigration are as high from counties in nonmechanized areas as from counties in highly mechanized areas An examination of African-American outmigration rates

TABLE African-American Net Migration, Southern Counties, 1950-1960

|                        |     | Net migration rate   | Net migration rate   |
|------------------------|-----|----------------------|----------------------|
| Subregion'             | N   | Mean'                | Std dev\_             |
| 61                     | 12  | 29.3                 | 9.6                  |
| 75                     | 5   | 34.7                 | 5.5                  |
| 76                     | 37  | 27.7                 | 9.9                  |
| South minus 61, 75, 76 | 474 | 22.5                 | 12                   |

- Mississippi River Hills; 75, Arkansas Prairie; 76, Mississippi Delta. 61 ,

Source. For counties (1974), U.S. Bureau of the Census, County Level Census Data, 1900-1950 (Ann Arbor) To estimate migration rates , it was also necessary to use U.S. Bureau of the Census\_ Census of Population 1960, statistics by states and counties (Washington; DC US GPO). To estimate migration rates, survival ratios were calculated from Census of Population 1960, United States Summary, Table 158 Economic subregions are outlined in Bogue and Beale (1961). Migration rates for counties with at least 5000 African-Americans are USDA (1965) from

- As percentage of the nonwhite population resident in the county in 1950.

TABLE

African-American Net Migration, Southern Counties , 1950-1960

Table 3 compares the Mississippi Delta and two bordering subregions (subregions 61 75 , and 76) to other southern counties in which African39 Americans primarily resided. This shows that a higher rate (in absolute value) of migration from the Delta and neighboring subregions existed compared to the rest of the South and appears to be consistent with the displacement by mechanization hypothesis. Organizing the data this way, however , obscures a uniformly high rate of migration from many counties in the South which concentrated in cotton production. If all the counties above are categorized by the percentage of crop acreage in cotton, it appears that cotton-intensive counties are characterized by greater rates (in absolute value) of net migration than other counties . Table 4 shows that the mean rate of net migration increases (in absolute value) for each group as cotton intensity increases (except for the group with the highest cotton intensity). Note, however, that the 20 to 309  cotton intensity interval appears to mark a break, including and above which migration rates   are uniformly high in absolute value. While   variables other than cotton intensity have not been controlled for, this observation suggests that elements common to counties with more than 209 of crop acreage in cotton were important to African-American migration of the 1950s. Mechanization of the harvest does not explain migration throughout the South, but changes connected with cotton production and its decline remain as potential explanations of migration.

|                           |    | Net migration rate   | Net migration rate   |
|---------------------------|----|----------------------|----------------------|
| X = %o cotton of cropland | N  | Mean'                | Std. dev\_            |
| X = 0                     | 59 | 14.8                 | 8.8                  |
| 0 &lt; X &lt; 10                | 96 |                      | 13.9                 |
| 10 &lt; X &lt; 20               | 66 | 20.8                 | 11.2                 |
| 20 &lt; X &lt; 30               | 96 | 26.1                 | 11.6                 |
| 30 &lt; X &lt; 40               | 94 | 27.4                 | 10.3                 |
| 40 &lt; X &lt; 50               | 46 | 27.5                 | 10.3                 |
| 50 &lt; X                    | 70 | 27.2                 | 9.7                  |

according to specialization in cotton production within the South illustrates the point.

In fact, this suggests that cotton acreage and output reductions may have played a role in outmigration that was as important as or even more

important than cotton harvest mechanization (on this issue, see Burford , 1966). Between the agricultural censuses of 1950 and 1959, cotton acreage in the secessionist southern states (excluding Florida and including only the eastern part of Texas, where African-Americans resided in large numbers) was reduced from about 16.2 million acres in 1959\_ Cotton output was 8.5 million bales in 1949 and 6.9 million 40 bales in 1959. Government allotments in specified years promoted decreased cotton acreage. A large part of cotton acreage reduction occurred after 1956, when the Federal Government Soil Bank Act of 1956 provided for compensation to landowners for allocating land to grasses (see Cochrane and Ryan, 1976, p. 228; Fite , 1984, p. 197). Acreage and output rebounded somewhat in 1959 after the program was discontinued. Government programs were not the only agents promoting a decline in cotton in the Southeastern United States . A full discussion of the relevant issues is beyond the scope of this paper, but the factors involved include increased competition in raw cotton production from the Texas and Oklahoma High Plains, from the Far West of the United States, from several other countries, and from synthetic fibers; an additional factor was the increased profitability of crops other than cotton in southern agriculture (on these issues see Fite, 1984; USDA 1987 PP. 46, 113-115).42

Finally , as a backdrop to viewing the migration rates presented in Table 4 one should note that among counties that concentrated on cotton production were many of the poorest in the South; cotton-intensive areas of the South had languished in poverty for decades, having few incentives to introduce new technology or industry (see Mandle, 1978) . When unskilled nonagricultural labor demand increased with World War II and wave of migration in the 1940s subsequently strengthened networks be43 tween the South and North , the poorest counties supplied large share

The acreage figures understate agricultural displacement in the sense that preharvest mechanization also occurred on the cotton acreage in many cases. On the other hand acreage reductions overstate the displacement effect to the extent that the large increase in yields implied more cotton harvested per acre and higher labor demand per acre The cotton acreage and output figures for the 527 counties referred to in Tables 3 and were 11.72 million acres and 7.05 million bales in 1949 and 6.03 million acres and 5.39 raillion bales in 1959.

In fact, acreage restrictions which countered decreases and cotton supports provided incentives for many farmers on marginal land to stay in cotton production, counteracting the displacement effects of the programs . price price

On World see Mandle (1978), Johnson and Campbell (1981) , and Wright 1986); on the importance of previous migrants see Gill (1979) and Wright (1986).

Increased agricultural wages rates during World War II (which, however, remained low compared to other occupations and regions and which generally remained at the higher level after the War) promoted the switch from labor-intensive cotton production. The decline in cotton production was also partially result of mechanization, as crops more amenable to mechanization increased in proftability (on this issue see Fite, PP. 164, 184)

of the South's African-American migrants to the North and West Coast (see Heinicke, 1991, PP. 212-213).

## 5. CONCLUSION

This investigation has revealed that the mechanical cotton picker directly accounts for, at the most, 249 of the 1950-1960 African-American net migration from the South. This upper bound estimate quantifies an effect hypothesized in previous literature . Parts of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas, as well as areas east of the Mississippi Delta-eastern Mississippi, and the states of Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia~all experienced substantial outmigration of African-Americans in the 1950s, but cotton harvest mechanization was not widespread in those areas until the 1960s. By implication, displacement by the cotton harvester before 1960 was not the main force that sent African-Americans 44 to northern urban areas  such as Detroit, Newark, and Philadelphia, which grew rapidly through migration and where by the 1960s an urban crisis was evident.

The estimates in this paper suggest that an investigation into causes of African-American migration in the 1950s other than the cotton picker is warranted Other machinery such as the tractor may have displaced African-Americans to a greater extent than the cotton harvester. Also, the great reduction in cotton acreage that took place could have pushed many 45 African-Americans from the region. In addition, despite the poor conditions of the northern cities into which migrants  streamed, better opportunities relative to the rural South contributed to the uniformly high rate of migration out of cotton areas , which had languished in poverty since the Civil War. This investigation does not cast doubt on Richard Day's path-breaking work (1967) concerning the Mississippi Delta proper , but it suggests that the mechanical cotton picker was not adopted on large scale elsewhere in the South and has been overemphasized relative to other causes of southern African-American outmigration.

A more balanced approach would consider the 1950s migration of African-Americans as result of important short-term changes -including, but not limited to, the cotton harvester and other long-term determi nants These longer-term factors include increased schooling, wage differentials between the South and other regions, racial  violence against

- The African-American migrants to cities east of Illinois came mainly from areas of the South located east of the state of Mississippi (see Davis and Donaldson, 1975) .
- Burford (1966) showed that southern outmigration rates were correlated with cotton acreage reductions Without a reduction in cotton acreage, or the adoption of the cotton harvester tractor adoption may have been unprofitable in cotton areas; displacing workers from preharvest employment would have induced migration, leading to reduced harvest labor supply (see Whatley, 1987). See the text for the limitations of cotton acreage reduction as an explanation of migration .

blacks in the South, the cumulative effect of previous migration to urban centers , and Northern postwar  growth. The decade of the 1950s was instrumental in the redistribution of the African-American population to urban centers and in reducing the numbers of impoverished African Americans in the rural South. This redistribution did not occur painlessly . On the contrary , many African-Americans moved to Northern ghettos with their own form of racism and absence of opportunity . In the light of the results above, however, it seems unlikely that cotton harvest mechanization should be targeted to the dislocation of African Americans during the 1950s. A combination of historical forces, in which the mechanical cotton harvester played a part, joined forces in the decline of the Old South and the relocation of a major portion of those formerly there. key living

## APPENDIX

## Calculation of Average Annual Hours per Family Spent Harvesting

Numerous studies of production conditions in the South provide information on the number of hours used in harvesting cotton. Several studies report that on average slightly under 100 hours are needed to harvest bale . To ensure an upper bound, 100 hours is used in the calculation below\_

To estimate the number of hours a family would have worked at harvesting cotton per year, an assumption must be made concerning the number of days worked in harvesting by various family members . Thirtyone days or 270 hours (at 8.7 hours per day) is used for heads of households and 25 days for non-heads of households (see Heinicke , 1991 , 97 for an explanation of estimates) .

workers, and especially children, picked at a slower rate than adults. It is assumed that non-heads of households on average picked at two-thirds the rate of household heads. This very likely understates the productivity of non-heads of households (see Heinicke, 1991, p. 97, for estimates) . Young

Finally , it is assumed that households on average have 2.5 available workers, the figure provided in MAES (1949) as the average per AfricanAmerican family for 292 families (p. 9)

in cotton harvesting.

## REFERENCES

Alston, L. J. (1987), 'The Wright Interpretation of Southern U.S. Economic Development: A Review Essay of Old South, New South by Gavin Wright. " Agricultural History 61, 52-67.

Alston, L. J., and Ferrie , J. (1993), Paternalism in Agricultural Labor Contracts in the

U.S. South: Implications for the Growth of the Welfare State. American Economic

Review 83, 852-876. Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station (ArAES) (1960), Economics of Mechanical Cotton Harvesting, by D. F. Capstick Bulletin 622. Fayetteville , AR Mar Beale, C. (1971), Rural-Urban Migration of Blacks: Past and Future American Journal of Agricultural Economics 53, 304-307 . Bogue , D New York: Free Press of Glencoe\_ Burford R L. (1966) , The Federal Cotton Programs and Farm Labor Force Adjustments Southern Journal of Economics 33, 223-236. Cochrane W.  and Ryan, M E. (1976). American Farm Policy 1948-1973. Minneapolis: J. (1982), The Decline in Black  Teenage Employment   1950-1960 American Economic Review 72, 620-637 Daniel , P (1985), Breaking The Land.  Chicago/Urbana \_ IL: Univ Of Illinois Press Daniel P. (1975), Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ , Press . Davis , G . A., and Donaldson, F D. (1975), Blacks in the United States: Geographic Perspective. New York: Houghton Mifflin R (1967), The Economics of  Technological Change and the Demise of the Sharecropper . American Economic Review 57, 3, 427-449.Dillingham, H. C. and D.F. (1966) The Mechanical Cotton Picker, Negro Migration, and the Integration Movement \_ Human Organization 25, 344-251. C. (1984), Cotton Fields No Lexington: Univ. Of Kentucky Press Fite, G. C. (1980), Mechanization of Cotton Production since World War II. Agricultural History 54, 198-204 Fusfeld D. R and Bates T. (1984), The Political Economy of the Urban Ghetto. Carbondale /Edwardsville: Southern Illinois Univ Press . Georgia Agricultural Experiment Station (GAES) (1959) Break-Even Points for Harvesting Machines, by J. C. Fortson Bulletin 66. Athens, GA Gill F (1979), Economics and the Black Exodus: An Analysis of Negro Emigration form the Southern U.S. 1910-70. New York: GarlandHeinicke C W (1991), African-American Migration from the Rural American South and Mechanization in Agriculture, 1940-60. Ph.D Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) (1974), County Level Census Data, 1900-50, U.S Bureau of the Census. Ann Arbor\_ MI: ICPSR Johnson , D M and Campbell , R. R. (1981) , Black Migration in America. Durham, NC: Duke Univ\_ Press Kirby, J T. (1987), Rural Worlds Lost. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univ Press . F. (1969), An Economic Analysis of Adoption of the Mechanical Corton   Picker. Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Chicago. Mandle , J. R. (1978), The Roots of Black Poverty Durham, NC: Duke Univ. Press\_ Mandle , J. R. (1992), Not Slave, Not Free. Durham, NC: Duke Univ. Press . Margo, R A. (1990), Race and Schooling in the South 1880-1950: An Economic History. Chicago: Univ . of Chicago Press . Margo, R A and Finegan, T. A (1993) , The Decline in Black Teenage Labor Force Participation in the South 1900-70; The Role of SchoolingAmerican Economic Review 83, 234-247, Mississippi   Agricultural   Experiment  Station (MAES) (1948), The Nature of an Efficient Agriculture in the Brown Loam Area of Mississippi, by F. J Welch, Director Bulletin 455. State MS\_ Cogan. Day . Sly , More. College .

MAES (1949), The and Mechanized by D Bulletin 463. State College, MS. June. MAES (1950), Mechanical Cotton Picker Operation In the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, by G. B Crowe Bulletin 465 State College, MS MAES (1954), The Cotton Plantation in Transition, by H Pederson and A F. Raper. Bulletin 508State MS. Jan. MAES (1960), Plantation Organization and the Resident Labor Force, Delta Area of Mississippi, by N. L LeRay, G B Crowe. Bulletin 606 State College MS. Peterson, W\_ and Kislev\_ Y. (1986) , "The Cotton Harvester in Retrospect: labor Displacement or Replacement?" Journal of Economic History 46, 199-216. Piven, F. F and Cloward, R A (1971), Regulating the Poor: The Functions of Public Welfare New York: Vintage Books Price, D 0 (1969). Changing Characteristics of the Negro Population, 1960 Census MonThe Economics of Mechanical Cotton in South Carolina, by C. P. Butler and H. L. Streetman\_ Bulletin 399. Clemson, SC Street , J of North Carolina Press Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide, 1976-77. A H. Belo United States Bureau of the Census (1959), United States Census of Agriculture Washington, DC; US GPO. United States Bureau of the Census (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition. Washington, DC: US GPO. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) (1951), Analysis of Factors Influencing Cotton Yields and Their Variability, by J . L. Fulmer and R R Botts. Technical Bulletin 1042.  Washington DC: US GPO. USDA (1965), Net Migration of the Population 1950-60 by Age, Sex, and Color , by G\_ K. Bowles , Economic Research Service.  Washington, DC: US GPO . USDA (1974), Statistics on Cotton and Related Data 1920-1973 Statistical   Bulletin 535 Washington; DC: US GPOOct. United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the (1951), State Economic J. Bogue.  Washington, DC: US GPO\_ Vickery, W. E (1977), The Economics of Negro Migration 1900-1960. York: Arno Press Whatley, W. . (1985), "A History of Mechanization in the Cotton South: The Institutional Hypothesis . Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1191-1215Whatley, W c. (1987), Southern   Agrarian Labor Contracts   as Impediments to Cotton Mechanization . Journal of Economic History 46, 45-70. Whatley, W C. (1991), "New Estimates of the Cost of Harvesting Cotton: 1949-1964 . Research in Economic History 13, 199-225 Wright, G. (1986), Old South, New South. New York: Basic Books. Wright, G. (1987) , The Economic Revolution in the American South Journal of Economic College , Picking Corp. Census New

Perspectives 1, 161-178.