<!-- image -->

## European Review of History: Revue européenne d'histoire

ISSN: 1350-7486 (Print) 1469-8293 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cerh20

## Cows and capitalism: humans, animals and machines in West German barns, 1950-80

## Veronika Settele

To cite this article: Veronika Settele (2018): Cows and capitalism: humans, animals and machines in West German barns, 1950-80, European Review of History: Revue européenne d'histoire, DOI: 10.1080/13507486.2018.1505833

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13507486.2018.1505833

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 19 Sep 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 6

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Cows and capitalism: humans, animals and machines in West German barns, 1950 -80

Veronika Settele

Friedrich-Meinecke-Institut, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany

## ABSTRACT

From the beginning of the 1950s, milking machines increasingly replaced former agricultural workers in West German stables who now preferred better-paid jobs in the industrial sector. The investment necessary for the milking machines led to new ideas about economic thinking and production-optimization, which changed the interplay among human, animal and technology. Within less than two decades, cattle farming in the Federal Republic of Germany changed from an animal-lacking, devastated economic branch of manual labour to a mechanized pro /uniFB01 t-oriented industry, which produced more than was demanded. This essay challenges the prevailing historical interpretation in which the industrialization of farming has been described as one of the last stages of capitalism s ' penetration of society. Central aspects of capitalism remained unful /uniFB01 lled: there was neither a free market nor individual autonomy of entrepreneurs, and wage labour literally vanished within the barns. A close-up view of the practices at the place of action reveals an arbitrary mixture of e /uniFB03 ciency and care that made the industrialization of animal farming di /uniFB00 er from the traditional narrative of capitalistic expansion. When animals are the resources to be utilized, capitalist economic activity reaches its limits at the point where the animals ' vital processes begin to malfunction. By bringing together human-animal studies with economic history, this article o /uniFB00 ers new insights into the role of animals as living beings in history as well as into the expansion of capitalism in an economic sector that continued to operate according to its own rules.

## ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 13 December 2017 Accepted 26 July 2018

## KEYWORDS

Animals; agriculture; capitalism; Germany; farming

' You also buy your milk here now? ' the cashier asked the cow in front of her at the supermarket register, as she waved the milk carton across the scanner. The cow responded indignantly: ' Of course! It is so cheap, I could hardly make it myself for this price! ' 1 The cost of milk in May 2016, on which this caricature played, fell to the national average of 23.96 cents per delivered litre of milk. 2 The cow s comment that she ' could hardly make it for the same price spoke equally to the plight of farmers whose businesses had been subject to /uniFB01 nancial stress by the price. While the costs for cow feed and stables had remained steady, low revenues had reduced wages, inhibiting the generation of surplus funds and the o /uniFB00 setting of investments. In short, for the near

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

future, less productive businesses were being driven into bankruptcy, leading to a greater concentration of larger businesses which produced milk at a lower cost. The primary cause for this fall in prices was the end of the European milk quota. The quota system limited the volume of milk produced and divided the national allotment to individual milk producers. The system expired on 1 April 2015, 31 years after its introduction in 1984. 3

The recent and increasingly substantial removal of subsidies, which had been criticized for decades, 4 was caused both by overall economic development and the drop in the macroeconomic importance of agriculture. The expiration of the milkquota system in 2015 allowed any business to produce as much milk as it wanted, which, in times of sinking prices meant: as much as possible. The resultant growth of volume triggered a further decrease in prices and this is why the cow in the caricature herself bought her milk at the supermarket. These current developments would make it appear as if the recent liberalization of the milk market had unleashed capitalism into the cow stables in the form of cost pressure and compulsion to rationalize. This narrative, however, is hardly new.

The business of the stables during the decades of even more intense state market regulation were also de /uniFB01 ned by rationalization and the anticipation of pro /uniFB01 ts. Prior to the introduction of milk quotas, national purchase guarantees and, after 1962, European purchase guarantees, applied even without limits. This policy of relying on subsidies saw early success in facilitating the movement of large numbers of people into new economic sectors. Since the 1950s, the speed of the annual movement of labour out of the agricultural branch tripled in comparison to the average of the past 100 years. 5 The fact that this happened without major con /uniFB02 icts at a time when West German democracy was still being consolidated, gave such agricultural policies signi /uniFB01 cant staying power as a form of welfare and social policy since the 1950s. 6

But in the very same period the cost-cutter s sharpened pencil entered the business of ' animal farming like never before. This article seeks to explain the economic transformation of German dairy farming at the sites of production of action in its most de /uniFB01 ning period of the recent past.

The dominant interpretation of both historians and the agricultural literature of the time described the increasing use of technology and ever more rationalized work /uniFB02 ow as a process of intense industrialization of German animal farming which had taken hold in the second half of the twentieth century. 7 Textbooks and advice literature on the pro /uniFB01 tability of dairy farming suggested with /uniFB01 gures, tables and graphics the absolute predictability of making pro /uniFB01 ts in the stables. This biological-economic scienti /uniFB01 cation shaped the discourse of the period and made it appear as if the mechanization of milking represented the last developmental stages of capitalism in an economic sector that had previously operated according to di /uniFB00 erent principles and rhythms. A closer examination, however, provokes doubt on this account: central de /uniFB01 ning characteristics of capitalism -including the presence of a free market, individual autonomy of the entrepreneur and dependent wage labour 8 -had not been achieved, making it problematic as an explanatory framework for the development of animal farming and the milk economy during mechanization. In turn, I argue for a closer examination that includes the animal and its position in the production process in order to shed light on the

<!-- image -->

question of why rationalization and cost pressure entered the barns at the same time as the expansion of the macroeconomic subsidy system.

As Sigfried Giedion argues in his 1948 work Mechanization Takes Command , which traces the sources and means of mechanization, the historian ' cannot dispense with the microscope ' if he or she wants to ' push his research into unusually invisible realms . ' 9 This study similarly zooms in on the commercial management of human, animal and machine in a particular phase of transformation. 10 What were the respective actions of the human and the cow? Who moved themselves where and how and to what extent did this interaction change during mechanization? The answers to these questions can be found in two types of sources: agricultural journals and the frequent letters to the editors that they contained provide an inside view, especially in points of di /uniFB03 culty where reality did not measure up to the promises of mechanization. Instructional books and /uniFB01 lms are the second type of sources assessed and provide an overview of the discourse of modernization through mechanization in animal farming. The overarching goal of the article is to shed light on a particular variety of capitalism at the site of its operation, therein further o /uniFB00 ering a contribution to Animal History. The focus on practices includes unconscious and unintentional actions and decreases the di /uniFB00 erentiation between action and function. This allows the corporeality of animals to be included in the analysis without necessarily viewing their behaviour as intentional.

## What happened in the barns?

The mechanization of milking represented a rupture in the business of the cow stables. This was, however, part of a long-term transformation of cow farming and the milk economy that changed the societal function of cows and milk, and /uniFB01 nally of the farmer. In the series ' Des Landmanns Winterabende , ' a tabloid advice paper on agricultural questions emphasized in 1910 that the primary argument for cow husbandry was its ' diverse usage , emphasizing how it provided ' ' milk, butter, cheese, meat, suet, leather, labour ' and in addition to these the greatest amount of the sort of fertilizer valuable for ' all types of soil . ' 11 This ' variety and indispensability of products ' meant that, despite low pro /uniFB01 ts, ' no agricultural business can do without them. ' 12 The advice paper was certainly wrong in arguing that: ' Without cow farming, no land cultivation! This sentence will apply for always and forever! ' 13 The proliferation of tractors and arti /uniFB01 cial fertilizers has removed plough-work and production of manure from the cow s primary tasks. The ' diverse usage of the animal was transformed into the production of meat and milk. In turn, human work with the animal was increasingly reduced to milking, which would itself become an argument for the rationalization of precisely this task when labour became scarce and more expensive.

## The framework: labour shortages, mechanization and cost accounting

' Would you please read through this list and indicate if there is anything on it that you can do? , ' so the participants of a study by the Allensbach Institute were asked in December 1952. 14 After cycling, cooking soup, swimming and knitting came: milking. The /uniFB01 fth most frequent skill that all West German citizens shared was the ability to milk a cow. Milking ranked above driving a car and using a typewriter. At the same time a

<!-- image -->

transformation seemed to be afoot. Members of the industry began discussing whether the occupation was dying out and complained of un /uniFB01 lled apprenticeships. 15 The reason was that the milking machine had rapidly found its way into the German stables and it was slated to change the working world of the stables more quickly and more thoroughly than farmers initially could have imagined.

The labour shortage in agriculture provided decisive momentum for the mechanization of milking in the second half of the twentieth century. The milking machine was not entirely new; the method of creating an intermittent vacuum, /uniFB01 rst manually and later by electricity, had been used since the nineteenth century to draw milk from the udder. 16 Since the 1950s, however, former agricultural workers increasingly found better-paid work in industrial companies. The emergent labour shortage resulted in the disappearance of wage labour in agriculture and exacerbated the bottleneck of milking in the stables: It was time-consuming and laborious to sit on a milking stool under and between cows twice a day and to milk the udder with one s hands. The ' advantages of the milking machine in solving the labour shortage was obvious. The machine replaced not only unavailable milkers by maximizing productivity and therein the number of milked cows per hour. It also eased the nature of the work meaning that ' even weaker persons (women, youth, etc), with the help of the machine , could ' ' undertake milking /uniFB02 awlessly without overexertion . ' 17 The visualization of manual milking prior to the machine s widespread adoption allows us to better grasp the revolution that ' the milking machine would later bring to the barns.

## Milking without a machine

The work procedure of milking prior to mechanization di /uniFB00 ered substantially from those needed in working with milking machines. Film footage from the 1950s makes it possible to capture the activities of the milker and the movements of the cow. The silent /uniFB01 lm Gewinnung guter Milch o /uniFB00 ers image sequences that provide a precise picture of milking work at the beginning of the 1950s in Schleswig-Holstein, the Black Forest and the Werdenfelser Land. 18 Mechanization was certainly not a linear process, resulting instead in gradual modi /uniFB01 cation and re-alignment of working procedures into new routines, work /uniFB02 ows and organization of time. It also resulted, more generally, in an inversion of movements between human and animal (Figure 1).

Even in the middle of the night, milkers woke up and went down into the stables. Drowsily, they coaxed the tied-up and equally drowsy cow to stand up. They took an apron and cap from a clothing rack and tied themselves to a milking stool. The milkers washed their hands and forearms in a sink and then divided up and took their respective places underneath an individual cow. They cleaned the udder and the back legs with straw and massaged the udder, which they rubbed with milk fat. They then began to rhythmically extract the /uniFB01 rst streams of milk into a pre-milking cup, which would be subsequently used as animal feed as it was unsuitable for human consumption. The actual milking then began. With a bucket between their legs, they started milking out a quarter of the cow s abdomen. The milking stool was supposed to have ' one or three legs and to be strapped onto the milkers. Four-legged stools would have prevented milkers from quickly coming up from underneath the cow, presenting a

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. ' Proper /uniFB01 st-milking. The milk shoots into the bucket in long, gradual streams. Force and duration of milking are essential for success. ' N. Andresen, Handmelken -Maschinenmelken. Ein Vergleich der beiden Arbeitsweisen (Oelde: Westfalia Separator AG, 1961), 9.

<!-- image -->

danger of injury if the animal pushed up against the wall or shifted in the direction of another cow. 19

As soon as the weather and temperature permitted, the cows were put out into the pastures. 20 This meant that the farmer was spared the work of feeding and clearing out animal waste. Milking however, became more strenuous, when the animals were further away from the barn. Under these conditions, the milkers were always the /uniFB01 rst ones to wake, and, in pairs of two, they headed out to the cows in the distant pasture. If the cow pastures were closer, they brought the cow to the tie-up stables for milking. 21 In either case, prior to mechanization, the human went to the cow for milking -a direction of movement that /uniFB01 rst changed with mechanization.

The milking-bucket was open-faced both in the stall and in the pasture. Dirt, grass and hay dust mixed in with the milk, changing its taste and reducing both its purity and shelf-life. It was precisely for this reason that educational /uniFB01 lms of the 1950 argued not only for washing one s hands before touching the cow s udder, but also for carefully ' ' washing the animal and keeping the stables airy and clean. The problem of tuberculosis highlighted in a particularly drastic way the dangers that milk could pose. In the 1950s, cows and humans mutually infected one another. The contagions seeped into the milk either because the animals were infected or because the farmer coughed into the open milk bucket. Milk was not yet subject to pasteurization, with bacteria /uniFB01 nding its way into the bodies of consumers, or, in the worst case, into that of an infant. 22 After milking, the frothy milk in the open milk bucket was strained with a cloth and subsequently loaded onto a vehicle, which transported the milk to the dairy (Figure 2). 23

In addition to solving the problem of labour, the milking machine also bore the potential advantage of increasing the safety of milk as a source of nutrition. ' Modern

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Milk production in past generations. While the contemporary urbanite may see in this image from 1950 a rural idyll, the experienced countryman would have recognized in it a potential hazard in which pathogens could contaminate the milk during straining, which would invert its seemingly healthful character. Bundesarchiv Berlin, Image 183 -08968-0006.

<!-- image -->

milking machines contribute to the quality of milk, ' so promised the /uniFB01 lm MilchKraftquell des Lebens ( Milk ' -The power source of life ) ' from 1954. The reduced exposure to air and dirt that resulted from having closed pipes lowered the danger of contamination, including from contagions. Concerns about hygiene were thus decisive arguments in favour of the mechanization of milking, whose signi /uniFB01 cance for public health was a highly charged issue. 24

## Milking with a machine

New questions come into view by approaching the history of mechanization as something more than simply an inevitability and focusing instead on how it represented a dramatic practical shift that took shape under the cross-in /uniFB02 uences of pressures of cost and e /uniFB03 ciency, established working routines and traditional practices of care. What did the human do and how did their actions change through mechanization? What did the machine do with the human, the animal and space, and to what extent did its inner logic in /uniFB02 uence the work /uniFB02 ow of the stables? Finally, what did the animal ' do ? ' To what extent did its behaviour in /uniFB02 uence the new economic activities of the barns (Figure 3)?

An advertisement for a milking machine from 1953 portrayed a smiling and satis /uniFB01 ed woman with a headscarf and working dress who carried milk jugs in both hands. 25 ' Successful work means: to manage work more rationally! ' the advertisement argued,

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. ' The milking machine doesn t know fatigue. Its milking power is steady. ' ' N. Andresen, Handmelken -Maschinenmelken. Ein Vergleich der beiden Arbeitsweisen , (Oelde: Westfalia Separator AG, 1961), 13.

<!-- image -->

further recounting how milking accounts for 53% of the work burden of the cow stables. The advertisement continued by relating how, thanks to the use of the bucket-milking machine, one could ' skimp on manpower and work time , while two ' cows could now be milked in parallel. A person placed themselves between the animals, attached both of them to milking utensils, which consisted of four teat-cups, and the machine immediately pumped milk from the udder into the bucket. The milker then went on to the next pair of cows. The reduced work load could ' hardly be appreciated enough . Nine-tenths of the milk volume was milked by machine, while the remaining ' tenth of the workload was to be completed by hand. Remaining handwork including the preparatory hand gripping of the udder, the gentle cleaning of the udder with a moist towel, the teat test during which the /uniFB01 rst milk streams were pumped out, and stimulation -a soft massaging of the udder and teats without which milk would not /uniFB02 ow. The post-milking process was also completed by hand. 26

Regarding the issue of pro /uniFB01 tability, the milker s spared ' /uniFB01 ngers proved less decisive than the time savings, which grew all the more with each increase in the number of cows milked by machine. The general consensus of the early 1950s held that the use of a machine reaped bene /uniFB01 ts when used with four or more cows. 27 It should be noted that the call from the outset to use milking machines not only on large-scale but also small-scale farms, represented an important exception in the patterns of the history of mechanization. 28 Naturally, the new work of cleaning the machines had to be subtracted from the amount of saved time. One could hardly /uniFB01 nd more fertile grounds for bacteria than raw milk in warm and damp stables. The cleaning of the machine represented a new practice that evoked scepticism and a certain reluctance toward the machine. It would take so much time, one contrarian voice argued in 1949, ' that, in aggregate, the amount of time saved would be too small to justify acquisition and maintenance costs. ' 29 But those doubts were rapidly swept away by the developments in the 1950s. Humans could no longer limit their care to animals, and now had to keep machines in proper functioning condition.

<!-- image -->

Though the role of humans in milking had been seriously transformed, their presence was far from obsolete. On the contrary, the milker acted as an indispensable middleman between animal and machine. One can /uniFB01 nd throughout the historical sources examples of imaginings of stables without humans, re /uniFB02 ecting the dream of mechanization rendering humans more and more super /uniFB02 uous. 30 Yet, this image was hardly accurate, particularly for the period of early mechanization in the 1950s and 1960s. The buckets in the milking system had to be moved by hand, the running of the machine had to be supervised and, if necessary, interrupted. Practices of care remained, such as cleaning, massaging, attaching and removing the milking instruments, or supervising the health of the animals. These tasks were decisive for the economic success of the barns. The need to care for the machine in addition to the animals constituted a new task. This also applied to the additional need of the farmer tobecome a salesman, as the Deutschlandspiegel , a monthly news platform of the Federal Press Agency, emphasized in November 1964. 31

Mechanization and cost calculation were two mutually reinforcing processes. Investment in milking machines required capital revenue and rational accounting, the latter of which similarly came to the fore as a new task alongside the management of animals. From the very beginning, capitalist calculations in the cow stables revolved around a mixed calculation. The production of the machine and the production of the cow were o /uniFB00 set. Easier to calculate than the correlation of time and money, however, was the correlation between investment and return on investment. Early thought on mechanizing milking emphasized that machines paid o /uniFB00 all the more based on the amount of milk they produced. 32 The amortization of costs was to be achieved through the growth in the production output of each individual animal. A larger number of animals, however, required additional feed, more space and more supervision, and would be seemingly more laborious than working with ' better ' animals which, per their genetic disposition, produced more milk with the same amount of feed. The costs of acquiring machines were to be made up for with higher milk productivity from the already available animals, which was ' to be achieved through appropriate feeding . ' 33 The intended results of mechanization were to both spare the human body from work and to achieve time savings. Yet, it also had several unintended consequences, as the machine s modes of operation broadly realigned the mutual work of the human and the ' animal in space.

With the bucket milking system, one could milk 14 to 16 cows per hour, an increase from the previous rate of seven to eight and without the resultant fatigue. 34 This tempo remained constant, but the full and heavy bucket still had to be lifted by hand between the cows and to the milk tank where it would be emptied. The pipeline milking machines provided relief, pumping the extracted milk through permanently installed pipelines in the stables that led directly to the cooling tank. This enabled further labour savings, which appeared necessary ' given the lack of good stable workers ' . 35 The machine meant dispensing with heavy lifting and enabled more rapid cooling of the milk. In addition, one worker could now simultaneously operate a second milking cluster, raising production to 20 to 22 milked cows per hour. 36 At the same time, the ' additional costs of a vacuum pipe line ' had to be considered, giving renewed importance to the farmer s sharpened calculation pencil. ' ' They who produce much, produce cheaply, ' according to the slogan that could be found throughout courses on cattle

<!-- image -->

breeding and milking. The rationalization of machine milking o /uniFB00 ered the key to answering the question of how, in a time of ever more expensive labour, one could ' produce more and cheaper milk . ' 37 In turn, the history of the milking machine did not end with the construction of pipelines in the stables, whose length made them di /uniFB03 cult to keep clean. Nor did pipelines change the fact that the milkers still had to move from animal to animal.

The next step in the series of technological changes which sought to save time and optimize work results entailed bringing the animals and their milk to the milker. With this innovation, the cow, who otherwise moved about at will in the free-range stables, trotted in at milking time either of its own volition or in response to the goading human. 38 Metal gates led the cows on their path toward the milking parlour. There, they met the milker who stood one metre lower, where she or he had a good grip on the udder from the side or from behind. The grip of the milker in the parlour hardly changed: initially, the /uniFB01 rst stream of milk from each udder was to be inspected in a premilking cup to enable early recognition of any possible udder diseases that would manifest themselves through changes in the milk. In the next step, the udder was cleaned with a damp towel. This was followed by massaging of the udder ' from the abdominal wall downward with closed /uniFB01 ngers in the rear half and with thumbs and ball of the palm in a circular pattern in the front half ' so that the milk would begin to shoot out. 39 Immediately thereafter, the milking machine would be attached. After the machine had milked, the milker used the milk completion grip to check the emptiness of the udder and /uniFB01 nish milking out the cow. This was a technique in which the work of the machine and the human handgrip intermingled. Initially, the milker would pull the machine forward to massage the leg quarter, then to the back as their hands switched to the stomach area in order to get as much of the milk as possible out of the udder -with the last portions containing the most fat. 40 The work /uniFB02 ow in the milk parlour depended on, among other things, whether a milking machine was available at each of the typically six or eight work stations or if the milking processes had already been arranged into a carousel. In 1964, a single person in a milk parlour with eight stations could milk 30 cows per hour. 41

Maintaining a smooth work /uniFB02 ow required the workers to use the time when the machine milked to prepare a new udder and ready the next cow after the milked cow s ' swift departure. This also required coordinating milking speeds with other cows in the parlour. The rationalization of milking within the parlour coincided with an entirely new way of building stables: the free-range stable. This stable type proved attractive for multiple reasons: ' The greatest advantage of the free-range stable with lying bays is the saving of time with spreading, mucking out and feeding, the achievement of comfortable, clean and high milk production, and the freedom of movement of the animal , as ' an article in the Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt argued in 1965. 42 This type of stable, however, required signi /uniFB01 cant /uniFB01 nancial investment that had to be milked in by a su /uniFB03 ciently larger herd of highly productive animals. The need for such economies of scale was already apparent by 1965, as the branch noted: ' The high costs for the establishment of milk- and milking-rooms requires a minimum of twenty or even better, twenty/uniFB01 ve cows. . . . The decision over one stable system over another depends on /uniFB01 nancial calculations. ' 43

<!-- image -->

The mechanization of milking favoured the expansion of herds, even though the application of the milking machine began on a small scale, with one bucket, two sets of milking utensils and, for example, six cows. The pressure for larger herds also came despite the fact that emphasis on expanding milk production had focused on keeping the same size of herd and using better feed. In the Federal Republic, this process was strengthened by the price politics of the European Economic Community (EEC), which until 1984 guaranteed purchase prices that were /uniFB01 xed, even if they were somewhat lower than general price and wage trends. Machines were re /uniFB01 nanced through the pro /uniFB01 t from milk. Although human labour, on the whole, became less important for milking, the milking process itself still remained the bottleneck in production in the cow stables and limited further expansion of industrial milk production. Since feeding and mucking out had been increasingly mechanized, working time devoted to milking by 1976 rose to 60% to 70% in comparison to 50% in 1953. 44

The described developments up to this point would seem to re /uniFB02 ect the continuous unfolding of capitalist logic, with the acquisition and implementation of machines making milking into part of a process of technology-supported rationalization that was directed by /uniFB01 nancial return calculations. This development only appears intuitive since the examination has heretofore left out a group of participants: the animals.

## Taking the animal into account

The /uniFB01 nal portion of the history of mechanization considered in this article witnessed inventive attempts to make the corporality of the cow more productive. Driven by their full udders and enticed with concentrated feed, the cows were now marched to those places that were most advantageous for the rational organization of work processes. The cow s corporality, however, proved to be both an ally and antagonist of mechanization. '

The cows had di /uniFB00 erent bodies with di /uniFB00 erent characteristics, which complicated the interaction between animal and machine. A glimpse into the stables suggests that it very much depended on how the machine operated whether or not the cow actually exclaimed ' I m in favour of this! ' ' as an advertisement from 1957 maintained. 45 Using their hands, milkers could ' completely adapt their hand to the milking conditions of a speci /uniFB01 c cow , but ' ' as soon as the milker began milking more than one cow at once, he must [. . .] always make a choice against one of the cows. ' So argued Biotechnik der Milchgewinnung -an instructional book that transmitted ' current knowledge ' (1974) to ' milk producers, advisers, veterinarians, and all subject pupils and students . ' 46 The greatest danger was that the milking machine would not stop when the respective quarter of the udder had already been emptied. The responsible human, in turn, had to pay attention to the machine and turn it o /uniFB00 if it continued to suck on an empty udder. This process of so-called ' blind-milking ' quickly damaged the /uniFB01 ne tissue of the milk glands and resulted in an infection of the respective udder quarter. When the health of the animal was harmed, the positive correlation between saved worked time and productivity in the cow stables was abruptly turned on its head. The body of the animal linked the business management of the individual farms with macroeconomic market plans. The increasing productivity of the animal that resulted from use of the machine reconciled the essentially contradictory aims of cheap food supply and satisfying revenues for the farmers, and placing the machine at the centre of the industrialization

of barn life for better and for worse. If the new mechanized technique however, damaged the animal, all that was in jeopardy. It was not only the reduced productivity of the sick animal that negatively in /uniFB02 uenced the farmer s pro ' /uniFB01 ts. Along with this came the additional treatment costs from veterinarians, expenses for medications and longerterm loss of milk production, since cows with antibiotic residues were not allowed to be placed in work rotations. In the worst-case scenario, the cow s premature death could ' occur. 47 The danger that the machine would cause injury to the udder was all the greater the more udders and their characteristics di /uniFB00 ered from one another -particularly regarding their milk/uniFB02 ow speed. Even by the mid-1970s, adapting the milking machine ' to di /uniFB00 erent udder and teat shapes was not even remotely possible . ' 48

Since the machine could ' not accommodate ' the ' error ' of the udder, to prevent it from ' having its full e /uniFB00 ect ' and ' endangering the pro /uniFB01 tability of the stables , the latter ' was adapted to the machine. 49 The milking-machine udder was therefore introduced, which was ' supposed to be milked out quickly, provide teats that were not too tightly bound, and o /uniFB00 er enough ground clearance for the milking machine through a tight mounting that was combined with an elongated form . ' 50 In addition to its external physical characteristics and its evenly spaced quarter distribution and teat-positioning, the milking-machine udder also had ' internal ' characteristics, speci /uniFB01 cally optimized milk /uniFB02 ow, milking speed and even distribution of the milk volume in the individual quarters. 51 Technology began to transform the animal. Scientists increasingly researched the heredity of udder characteristics, including at the Max-Planck-Institute (MPI) for Animal Husbandry and Animal Nutrition in Mariensee. 52 The new breeding goal of ' milkability ' was introduced. 53 From the beginning, the development of the milking machine appeared to be the ' most di /uniFB03 cult task that agricultural engineers ever faced ' since they had to work ' on living beings and, additionally, on a very sensitive organ . ' 54 This task was hardly completed with the introduction of the /uniFB01 rst milking machine. Instead, the machine itself became a challenge for pro /uniFB01 tability and productivity, which depended on the health of the animal: ' The optimal production levels in milk-cow farming is determined exclusively by the animal s health, ' ' as a study at the MPI in Mariensee demonstrated. 55

In animal farming, time alone did not appear to be money after all. Disruptions ' not with the machine, but rather with the animals and their productivity ' were the greatest danger for the pro /uniFB01 tability of the barns. 56 This made the conducting of business in lifeforms fundamentally di /uniFB00 erent from the industrial production of inorganic materials. The corporality of the animals subjected the business of the barns to standards that included but went beyond biological disruptions, like infected udders. As a living being, the cow also became accustomed ' naturally to a speci /uniFB01 c milking method ' and reacted to changes with hesitancy or even refusal to give milk. 57 An acceleration of the number of cycles on the milking-machine pulsator often resulted in a reverse e /uniFB00 ect: ' When the pulse alteration is too rapid, the cows will often become unsettled and sometimes even kick. ' 58 ' Particularly when the teat cups are placed on poorly, the cow feels constant pain, jerks, and kicks repeatedly, ' so the Wochenblatt warned in 1957 regarding the risks of machine milking. 59 '' Liesl ' does mind how she is milked, ' and to such an extent that the joke '' Here comes the milker with the colds hands ' is not far from reality. ' 60 Milking by machine only worked well when machine milkers understood how to act as a mediator between the cow and machine, since every cow was an individual living being and ' therein

<!-- image -->

. . . always revealed the primary weaknesses of the milking machine . ' 61 The turnover of employees in the cow stables was re /uniFB02 ected in the unsettledness of the animals and sometimes in decreased milk production, which, in turn, unsettled farmers as well as agricultural planners.

The human undoubtedly and absolutely determined the boundaries of the cow s ' ' veto-powers ' in the stables, though the animal co-shaped its own economic utilization through its body, its behaviour as well as its productivity. It was therefore ' not to be treated like ' cattle '' as one agriculturist argued to his fellow counterparts in 1964. The ' animals have a sensitive feeling for the way a human engages with them , and ' ' if one jumps around with them like a ' cow , they can become petulant or even malicious ' ' and take their ' revenge . They must be treated well, he argued, not only because they are ' ' also animals of God s creation , ' ' which ' in spite of all necessary measures regarding rationalization (and) increased output ' must not be forgotten. They must also be well treated, he continued, because ' cows that get hit or kicked at every turn become intractable, give milk more slowly or not at all, and therein lag behind in production. ' 62

The cow, as a large, strong and heavy mammal who could see, hear, smell, taste and feel, was, in short, a discrete actor in the structures of both the old and the new stables economy. The condition of the animal as a living being shaped the sector s internal ' economic logic and delimited the dynamics of capital investment. Investments in the new milking machine were to be re /uniFB01 nanced through added milk revenues. The boundaries of production growth, however, were not simply de /uniFB01 ned by the force of the milking machine or the working time of the human, but also by the health and well-being of the cow. Viewing the history of the development of a new, e /uniFB03 cient technological and industrial agricultural sector as a smooth replacement process would be to miss the core of developments. Imaginings of industrial production evoke associations that did not correspond to the realities of the cow barns after 1950. The language of the sector even ascribed animals with intentional agency. They were personi /uniFB01 ed, sought ' revenge , ' ' went on strike ' or gave more milk if they heard music that they enjoyed. 63 Economic success depended on the corporeal constitution of the animal and its production was a yardstick of revenue and pro /uniFB01 t. The nature of working with living beings, as it was not completely predictable, limited the spread of capitalist economics. 64 The sector, on the one hand, generated ever-growing biological-economic knowledge regarding the connection between feed costs and milk production in addition to the causes of illness and the e /uniFB00 ects of medication. On the other hand, the organic processes of the animal and arguably also its behaviour -such as when it ambled slowly into the milk parlour and therein slowed production -remained up until the end, incalculable.

## Conclusion: human, cow, machine and the recon /uniFB01 guration of space

An examination of the mechanization of milking between 1950 and 1980s in the Federal Republic reveals a phase of transformation in cattle farming and in the milk economy whose e /uniFB00 ects were particularly decisive in the early years until 1965. While this history took place in the countryside, it also in /uniFB02 uenced life beyond the stables by generating cheaper food staples, leaving a signi /uniFB01 cant portion of household incomes for other types of consumption. It further reinforced the extant pattern of migration to the city that had resulted from the declining attractiveness of jobs in animal farming. In

addition, the milking machine led to the increasing disappearance of cows from the outdoors environment. The mechanical rationalization of the bottlenecks of production in milking shifted cow farming indoors, since milking could be done most productively inside the barns. Cows increasingly disappeared from the meadows and the streets from which they had once been driven in and out, instead spending with greater frequently most of the year in the stables. Free-range stables and milk parlours represented new spaces that became the point of origin of the two chimerical tropes that shaped the image of agriculture in the Federal Republic: industrialized production on the one hand and an advertisement-like agrarian romanticism on the other. The status of the cow as a living being made the mechanization of milking into an idiosyncratic amalgamation of practices of e /uniFB03 ciency and care. This mixture made the process di /uniFB00 erent from a traditional capitalist history of expansion. The balance sheet of the stables depended on the interplay among the cow, the machine and the milker.

The milking machine transformed the practices of both humans and animals in the stables. The new procedures, however, generated a modern agricultural sector that vacillated between rational high industrialization and agrarian-romantic naturalness. Actions within the stables, however, continued to centre on the animal and its behaviour. Mechanization did not depreciate the animals ' position in the work process. On the contrary, they moved further towards the heart of the barn economy. In collaboration with the machine, the animal was meant to increase productivity, thereby enabling cheaper milk production without reducing the farmer s income. This dynamic lies at ' the centre of why rationalization and cost pressure entered the barns despite the simultaneous expansion of the macroeconomic subsidy system. More productive animals promised to solve all of the problems. At the same time, the animals were also able to threaten the whole endeavour.

The life processes of the cow represented the source of the creation of value in the stables, which continued to be the case within mechanized animal farming. Their health was a factor that was di /uniFB03 cult to predict with any precision, and which could endanger the pro /uniFB01 tability of business. In turn, rationalization of the economic management of living beings had to attend to di /uniFB03 culties that did not exist in production processes in areas of a non-organic nature. Even within mechanized production and its accompanying processes of capitalist rationalization, non-capitalist forces continued to play a role.

Max Weber s ' ' rational capitalizing ' and orientation toward future pro /uniFB01 tability both found their way into the West German barns as did the ' four C s , which according to ' ' Jens Beckert, allowed capitalism to expand. 65 ' Credit ' became more essential than ever before, given the need to acquire new technology. ' Commodi cation /uniFB01 ' drove capitalism in the stables, with new biological knowledge used to make the bodily production of the cow more predictable, therein making it into a commodity. ' Creativity ' in the sense of economic optimization was in high demand as a means of securing the continued existence of businesses in the face of politically mandated price pressures. Finally, ' competition , in the form of a struggle for survival, became a part of the experience ' of each small and mid-sized agricultural business in the Federal Republic. 66 With its increasingly systemic and therefore rational organization of business and work, the management of the stables ful /uniFB01 lled ' the central characteristic of modern capitalism . ' 67 Though on a macroeconomic level, it represented a heavily state-directed economic

sector that was far from an ideal model of free markets and autonomous actors, on the

<!-- image -->

micro-level of economic activity, capitalist e /uniFB03 ciency techniques developed momentum. An examination of West German cow stables illustrates that the extent of freedom in the market is by no means decisive for the development of productivity-boosting capitalist rationalization characterized by credit, commodi /uniFB01 cation, creativity and competition. The simultaneous expansion of e /uniFB03 ciency-oriented capitalist economics in the stables and the growth of state direction of the sector would even suggest that economic activities in the West German cow stables, in terms of practices, may exhibit similarities with their East German counterparts in terms of processes of work organization and production orientation.

## Notes

- 1. Caricature of Kitthawk in taz , June 18, 2015, 8.
- 2. ec.europa.edu/agriculture/market-observatory/milk/pdf/eu-historical-prices-series\_en.xls.
- 3. Fluctuations in the world market were responsible for the extreme fall in prices in early 2016, during which the price of milk declined by 30% within a matter of weeks. The German milk economy, highly dependent on exports, was negatively impacted by both decline in demand in Asia, and China in particular, as well as the Russian import ban on EU agricultural products of 6 August 2014, imposed in reaction to sanctions by the EU, the United States, Canada, Austria and Norway in the wake of the Ukraine con /uniFB02 ict.
- 4. Wehler, Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte , 86; and Patel, Europäisierung wider Willen , 510.
- 5. Ambrosius, ' Wirtschaftlicher Strukturwandel und Technikentwicklung , 107; Schildt, ' Die Sozialgeschichte der Bundesrepublik Deutschland , 19; and Raphael, ' Arbeitsbiogra /uniFB01 en und Strukturwandel ' nach dem Boom '' , 32 -67, esp. 36.
- 6. Patel, ' Der Deutsche Bauernverband 1945 bis 1990 , 161; Spoerer, ' ' Agricultural Policies in Western Europe since 1945 , 192; and Knudsen, ' Farmers on Welfare , 308 -17. Knudsen shows how the high expenses in the realm of agriculture since the 1950s stand in a tradition of welfare aims in the twentieth century. Programmes to guarantee farm income were conceptualized as instruments of social engineering rather than being just the success of farmers ' lobby organizations.
- 7. On the prevailing approach in agricultural history that treats the industrialization of animal farming as one of capitalism s last steps in its relentless extension see, for example, ' Münkel, Der lange Abschied vom Agrarland ; Windhorst, ' Industrialisierungsprozesse in der Agrarwirtschaft ; Kluge, ' '' Veredelungswerkstatt ' oder ' Rohsto /uniFB00 fabrik ? ' ' , 50; for a more nuanced view beyond the dichotomy of industrialization vs. nature, see: Smith-Howard, Pure and Modern Milk , 6; Vogel, ' Wissen, Technik, Wirtschaft ; and van der Ploeg, ' The Virtual Farmer. Past, Present and Future of the Dutch Peasantry , esp. 247 -56.
- 8. Kocka, ' Writing the History of Capitalism , 12; and Kocka, ' Geschichte des Kapitalismus , 18, 20.
- 9. Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command , 5.
- 10. Within the space of a few years, cattle farming was transformed from a neglected economic sector, reliant on manual labour, oriented toward the needs of war and ' devoid of cows , into a mechanized, pro ' /uniFB01 t-driven sector whose production exceeded demands. On the state of cattle farming after the Second World War, see ' Aufgaben der Rinderzucht im nordwestdeutschen Raum. Kein Eingri /uniFB00 in die Milchviehbestände / Der Wert des Herdbuchwesens , ' Mitteilungen der DLG , May 5, 1946, 24 -5.
- 11. Schmid and Schuemacher, Zucht und Haltung des Rindes , 10.
- 12. Ibid.
- 13. Ibid.
- 14. Noelle Neumann and Peter Neumann, Jahrbuch der Ö /uniFB00 entlichen Meinung 1947 -1955 , 46.
- 15. Erhard, ' Muß der Berufsmelker aussterben? , 158. '

- 16. The American engineer L.O. Colvin patented a machine in 1860 that sucked milk from the udder with a constant vacuum, but which simultaneously injured the cow. Thirty years later in Europe, a milking machine was invented with a pulsator that drew rhythmically on the udder like a calf. See Olmstead and Rhode, ' Conceptual issues for the Comparative Study of Agricultural Development , 41. Known European inventors included the Scottish ' men William Murchland and Alexander Shields, who patented the ' thistle mechanical milking machine ' in 1895. See Trow-Smith, A History of British Livestock Husbandry , 308. In Sweden, Gustav de Laval introduced an improved pulsating milking machine in 1913.
- 17. Bartmann, Mechanisierte Milchgewinnung , 13.
- 18. Bundesarchiv Berlin, Abteilung Filmarchiv (hereafter BArch, Abt.FA), BSP 25821 -2. Silent Film with Text, Gewinnung guter Milch , Deutsche Verwaltung für Volksbildung, Zentralbildstelle, no year given, presumably around 1950.
- 19. BArch, Abt. FA, BSL 21719, Mit der Kuh auf du und du , Film of the DEFA Studio for popular scienti /uniFB01 c /uniFB01 lms, 1956. The /uniFB01 lm presents 20 cases of accidents in cow farming that resulted from carelessness and which should be avoided.
- 20. BArch, Abt.FA, BSP 25821 -2, Gewinnung guter Milch , Silent /uniFB01 lm with text.
- 21. This can be seen in BArch, Abt. FA K 334883 -1, Sig.31307, Woher kommt die Milch? Film of the Zentralinstitut für Film und Bild im Unterricht, Erziehung und Wissenschaft. Images from Brandenburg, 1952.
- 22. Röder, ' Tuberkulose beim Menschen , ' 549 -59; Lohner, ' Ein praktisches Beispiel für Rinder , 36. See also, BArch, Abt. FA, BSP 15483 ' -2, Milch-Kraftquell des Lebens , DEFA 1954.
- 23. BArch, Abt. FA K 334883 -1, Sig. 31307, Woher kommt die Milch? Film of the Zentralinstitut für Film und Bild im Unterricht, Erziehung und Wissenschaft. Images from Brandenburg, 1952.
- 24. BArch, Abt. FA, BSP 15483 -2, Milch -Kraftquell des Lebens , DEFA 1954; Die Zeit unter der Lupe 696/1963, www. /uniFB01 lmothek.bundesarchiv.de/video/584547?q=Milch, from 2:10; P. Rinteln, ' Zum Problem des Milchpreises , ' Neue Mitteilungen für die Landwirtschaft , May 20, 1950, 315.
- 25. ' Advertisement for a Bucket , 591. '
- 26. Stein, ' Die betriebswirtschaftliche Bedeutung der Melkmaschine , 1678. '
- 27. Ibid.
- 28. The mechanization of agriculture began with small businesses, as Deborah Fitzgerald has demonstrated in a study of land cultivation in the United States. Previous work on the industrialization of agriculture has generally focused on land cultivation. References to animal farming, however, are common as they make it easier to relate and comprehend the mass-scaling of agricultural production in a more concrete way. An empirical expansion of this argument into the realm of cattle farming has not yet been undertaken. See, for example, Fitzgerald, Every Farm a Factory , 4. ' Over the course of the twentieth century large parts of agricultural production have taken place in factories (for example, con /uniFB01 nement poultry and hogs) , ' Uekötter, Die Wahrheit ist auf dem Feld , 19: ' The ground formerly held by a country-farmer mentality was [. . .] replaced with an economic-agricultural mentality, whose divergence from the urban majority of the popularization was re /uniFB02 ected, for instance, in the nature of dealing with animals . '
- 29. Von Oertzen, ' Auf Leserbriefen: Elektrisch melken, warum nicht auch bei uns? ' Neue Mitteilungen für die Landwirtschaft , July 2, 1949, 509.
- 30. The rhetoric of the period conveys the impression that the human had become super/uniFB02 uous. Amidst a period of enthusiasm for technology, the industry played down the remaining function of humans. As the spokesman for the journal, Deutschlandspiegel , argued in 1978, acquisition of milk would be fully automatic. The attached image, however, portrayed a woman that placed the milking instruments on the cow. The cows in this period could hardly be milked by themselves. BArch, www. /uniFB01 lmothek.bundesrachiv. de/video/589830?q=Milch (from 2:05). Given that this history of mechanization continues

- into the present, it should be noted that the recent development of milking robots has, when they are functioning smoothly, increasingly replaced humans.
- 31. BArch, www. lmothek.bundesarchiv.de/video/589661?q=Milch. /uniFB01 Deutschlandspiegel 122/ 1964, Report on Agriculture (after Minute 4:15).
- 32. Eisenreich, ' Die Melkmaschine im Kleinbauernbetrieb , 417. '
- 33. Ibid.
- 34. Bartmann, Mechanisierte Milchgewinnung , 12.
- 35. Laub, ' Milch wird selbstständig . '
- 36. See note 34.
- 37. Spengler, ' Warum Viehhaltungs- und Melkkurse? , 1248. '
- 38. In the journal Deutschlandspiegel from 11 November 1964, one /uniFB01 nds an image of blackand-white spotted cows in a /uniFB01 shbone milking parlour, in which they are placed diagonally to the milking pit in which the milker is undertaking his work See www. lmothek. /uniFB01 bundesarchiv.de/video/589,661 (From 6:05).
- 39. Kintzel, Die Arbeit im Fischgrätmelkstand , 57.
- 40. Ibid., 59.
- 41. See note 34.
- 42. Anon., ' Rinderställe zweckmäßig eingerichtet , 12. '
- 43. Ibid.
- 44. Weber, ' Mehr Technik um die Kuh , 12. '
- 45. Advertisement for the milking machine Westfalia 1957 in Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt , 45.
- 46. Karl Rabold and others, Biotechnik der Milchgewinnung , 92.
- 47. Ibid., 94.
- 48. Ibid., 3.
- 49. Anon., ' Gibt es ein Melkmaschinen-Euter? ' 28.
- 50. Witt, Max-Planck-Institut für Tierzucht und Tierernährung Mariensee , 21.
- 51. Hecker, '' Dieses Tier hat ein schönes Euter '' , 16.
- 52. See note 50.
- 53. Wilke, ' Gefragt sind gut melkbare Euter , 15. '
- 54. Hupfauer, ' Maschinelles Melken , 1437. '
- 55. Blohm, ' Die Abhängigkeit der optimalen Leistungshöhe von den betriebs- und marktwirtschaftlichen Gegebenheiten , 20. '
- 56. Anon., ' Größte Reinlichkeit , 1729. '
- 57. Rühmann, ' Maschinenmelken -nicht ohne Gefühl , 20. '
- 58. Anon., ' Prügel haben auch im Kuhstall keinen Wert , 15. '
- 59. Ibid.
- 60. Anon., ' Stammt ihre Milch von glücklichen Kühen? , 32. '
- 61. Tidl, ' Warum noch Viehhaltungs , 35. '
- 62. Bauer, ' Tiere nicht wie ' Vieh ' behandeln , 21. '
- 63. Abold, ' Musik im Stall wirkt , 5. '
- 64. As David Goodman, Bernardo Sory and John Wilkinson argue: ' Agriculture confronts capitalism with a natural production process. Unlike sectors of handicraft activity, agriculture could not be directly transformed into a branch of industrial production. [. . .] Unable to remove these constraints directly by devising a uni /uniFB01 ed production process, industrial capitals have responded by adapting to the speci /uniFB01 cities of nature in agricultural production. Within the changing limits de /uniFB01 ned by technical progress, discrete elements of the production process have been taken over by industry. [. . .] This discontinuous but persistent undermining of discrete elements of the agricultural production process, their transformation into industrial activities, and their re-incorporation into agriculture as inputs we designate as appropriationism . ' Goodman, Sory, and Wilkinson, From Farming to Biotechnology , 1 -2.
- 65. Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Erst Teil: Die Wirtschaft und gesellschaftliche Ordnungen und Mächte, §11 Begri /uniFB00 und Arten des Erwerbens, Kapitalrechnung; In

contrast to Marx, who focuses on class con /uniFB02 icts, Max Weber and Werner Sombart place rational organization of business and work in companies at the centre of their understanding of modern capitalism. See also, Kocka, ' Writing the History of Capitalism , 9; and ' Beckert, ' Capitalism as a System of Expectations , 327. '

- 66. On this topic, see also Welskopp, Unternehmen Praxisgeschichte , 11 -13.
- 67. Kocka, ' Writing the History of Modern Capitalism , 12. '

## Acknowledgements

For their critical perspectives and helpful comments on earlier versions of this essay, I thank Norman Aselmeyer, Jana Bruggmann and Johanna Noske, as well as Sören Brandes, Malte Zierenberg, the editorial sta /uniFB00 of Mittelweg 36 , where this article was /uniFB01 rst published within the special issue ' Praktiken des Kapitalismus , ' and the anonymous referees of European Review of History . I am deeply grateful to Jeremy DeWaal for his careful translation of this article.

## Disclosure statement

No potential con /uniFB02 ict of interest was reported by the author.

## Notes on contributor

Veronika Settele is research associate at the FU Berlin s Friedrich-Meinecke-Institut, where she ' also serves as assistant editor of the journal Geschichte und Gesellschaft . Pursuing her doctoral dissertation Revolution im Stall: Landwirtschaftliche Tierhaltung in Deutschland, 1945 -1990 (Revolution in the stable: animal farming in Germany, 1945 -1990) she is concerned with morality and the economy, particularly around animals, farming, food production and eating. More broadly, she is interested in changing societies in modern times, documented also by her previous studies in the /uniFB01 elds of history of migration (M.A., 2012) and democratic theory (M.Sc., 2014). Together with Norman Aselmeyer she recently coedited the volume Geschichte des NichtEssens: Verzicht, Vermeidung und Verweigerung in der Moderne (History of non-eating: abstinence, avoidance and abnegation in the Modern Age, HZ Supplement 73/Munich 2018).

## Bibliography

Abold, A. ' Musik im Stall wirkt. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 158, no. 48 (1968): 5.

- ' Advertisement for a Bucket Milking Machine from the Brand Label ' Westfalia. '' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 143 (1953): 591.
- Ambrosius, G. ' Wirtschaftlicher Strukturwandel und Technikentwicklung. ' In Modernisierung im Wiederaufbau: Die Westdeutsche Gesellschaft der 50er Jahre , edited by A. Schildt and A. Sywottek, 107 -128. Bonn: Dietz, 1993.

Anon. ' Gibt es ein Melkmaschinen-Euter? Rinderzüchter verwahren sich gegen unsachliche Behauptungen. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 147 (1957): 28.

- Anon. ' Größte Reinlichkeit -sorgsamste Euterp /uniFB02 ege: Melkmaschine und Melkfett. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 144 (1954): 1729.
- Anon. ' Prügel haben auch im Kuhstall keinen Wert. Tiere, die beim Melken schlagen, leiden oft an einer Euterentzündung. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 147, no. 2 (1957): 15.

Anon. ' Rinderställe zweckmäßig eingerichtet. Die Technik muß für bessere Arbeitsleistungen sorgen. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 155, no. 46 (1965): 12.

18

Anon. ' Stammt ihre Milch von glücklichen Kühen? Der ' Liesl ' ist es nicht egal, wie sie gemolken wird. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 159, no. 51/52 (1969): 32.

Bartmann, R. Mechanisierte Milchgewinnung . Berlin: Deutscher Landwirtschaftsverlag, 1964.

Bauer, J.B. ' Tiere nicht wie ' Vieh ' behandeln. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 154, no. 15 (1964): 21.

Beckert, J. ' Capitalism as a System of Expectations: Toward a Sociological Microfoundation of Political Economy. ' Politics and Society 41 (2013): 323 -350.

Blohm, G. ' Die Abhängigkeit Der Optimalen Leistungshöhe Von Den BetriebsUnd Marktwirtschaftlichen Gegebenheiten. ' In Physiologische Grundlagen Und Wirtschaftlichkeit Tierischer Nutzungsleistungen , edited by Max-Planck-Institut für Tierzucht und Tierernährung, 15 -30. Mariensee: Max-Planck-Institut, 1963.

Eisenreich, L. ' Die Melkmaschine im Kleinbauernbetrieb. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 141 (1951): 417.

Erhard, A. ' Muß der Berufsmelker aussterben? ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 143 (1953): 158.

Fitzgerald, D. Every Farm a Factory: The Industrial Ideal in American Agriculture . New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002.

Giedion, S. Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History . New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.

Goodman, D., B. Story, and J. Wilkinson. From Farming to Biotechnology: A Theory of AgroIndustrial Development . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Hecker, Dr. '' Dieses Tier hat ein schönes Euter . . .so steht s bei Ludwig Thoma in ' ' ' Erster Klasse, -Das ' schöne Euter ' wird immer wichtiger für den Nutzen unserer Milchvielhaltung. '

- Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 151, no. 15 (1961): 16.

Hupfauer, M. ' Maschinelles Melken. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 143 (1953): 1437. Kintzel, F. Die Arbeit Im Fischgrätmelkstand . Berlin: Deutscher Landwirtschaftsverlag, 1961.

Kluge, U.

''

Veredelungswerkstatt Oder Rohsto ' '

/uniFB00

fabrik ? Westdeutsche Agrar- Und Ernährungspolitik

'

Zwischen Wirtschaftlicher Rekonstruktion Und Römischen Verträgen (1945

-

1957).

'

Jahrbuch Für

Die Geschichte Des Ländlichen Raumes

2 (2005): 46

-

58.

Knudsen, A., and L. Christina. Farmers on Welfare: The Making of Europe s ' Common Agricultural Policy . Cornell: Cornell University Press, 2009.

Kocka, J. ' Writing the History of Capitalism: First Gerald D. Feldman Memorial Lecture. ' Bulletin of the GHI 47 (2010): 7 -24.

Kocka, J. Geschichte des Kapitalismus . Munich: C.H. Beck, 2013.

Laub, A. ' Milch wird selbständig. Arbeitserleichterung beim maschinellen Melken durch Absaugleitungen. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 148, no. 4 (1958): 14.

Lohner J. ' Ein praktisches Beispiel für Rinder-Tuberkulosebekämpfung. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 143 (1953): 36.

Münkel, D., ed. Der lange Abschied vom Agrarland: Agrarpolitik, Landwirtschaft Und Ländliche Gesellschaft Zwischen Weimar Und Bonn . Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag, 2000.

Noelle Neumann, E., and E. Peter Neumann. Jahrbuch Der Ö /uniFB00 entlichen Meinung 1947 -1955 . Allensbach: Verlag für Demoskopie, 1956.

Olmstead, A. L., and P. W. Rhode. ' Conceptual Issues for the Comparative Study of Agricultural Development. ' In Agricultural and Economic Development in Europe since 1870 , edited by P. Lains and V. Pinilla, 27 -51. New York: Routledge, 2009.

Patel, K. K. Europäisierung wider Willen: Die Bundesrepublik Deutschland in Der Agrarintegration Der EWG 1955 -1973 . Munich: Oldenbourg, 2009.

Patel, K. K. ' Der Deutsche Bauernverband 1945 Bis 1990: Vom Gestus Des Unbedingten Zur Rettung Durch Europa. ' Vierteljahrshefte Für Zeitgeschichte 58 (2010): 161 -179.

Rabold, K., E. Lanser, M. Maynth, and L. Paizs. Biotechnik Der Milchgewinnung: Gesunde Kühe, Richtiges Melken, Mehr Milch . Hildesheim: Verlag Th. Mann, 1974.

Raphael, L. ' Arbeitsbiogra /uniFB01 en und Strukturwandel ' nach dem Boom : ' Lebensläufe und Berufserfahrungen Britischer, Französischer Und Westdeutscher Industriearbeiter und -Arbeiterinnen Von 1970 Bis 2000. ' Geschichte Und Gesellschaft 43 (2017): 32 -67.

Röder, K.H. ' Tuberkulose beim Menschen -eine Reinfektionsmöglichkeit für die sanierten Rinderbestände. ' Tierärztliche Umschau 19 (1964): 549 -559.

Rühmann, H. ' Maschinenmelken -nicht ohne Gefühl. Die Kuh gewöhnt sich rasch an eine bestimmte Methode. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 157, no. 46 (1967): 20.

Schildt, A. Die Sozialgeschichte der Bundesrepublik Deutschland Bis 1989/90 . Munich: Oldenbourg, 2007.

Schmid, A., and B. Schuemacher. Zucht Und Haltung Des Rindes . Vols. 39. Special Edition of Des Landmanns Winterabende , Stuttgart, Germany: Verlag Eugen Ulmer, 1910.

Smith-Howard, K. Pure and Modern Milk: An Environmental History since 1900 . New York: Oxford University Press, 2013.

Spengler, Dr. ' Warum Viehhaltungsund Melkkurse? ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 142 (1952): 1248.

Spoerer, M. ' Agricultural Policies in Western Europe since 1945. ' In Perspectives on European Economic and Social History , edited by J. O. Hesse, C. Kleinschmidt, and R. Stokes, 181 -194. Baden-Baden: Nomos, 2014.

Stein, Dr. ' Die betriebswirtschaftliche Bedeutung der Melkmaschine. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 143 (1953): 1678.

Tidl, H. ' WarumnochViehhaltungs- und Melkkurse. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 152, no. 14 (1962): 35.

Trow-Smith, R. A History of British Livestock Husbandry, 1700 -1900 . Abingdon: Routledge, 2006. Uekötter, F. Die Wahrheit Ist Auf Dem Feld: Eine Wissensgeschichte Der Deutschen Landwirtschaft . Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht, 2010.

Van der Ploeg, J. D. The Virtual Farmer: Past, Present and Future of the Dutch Peasantry . Assen: Royal van Gorcum, 2003.

Vogel, J. ' Wissen, Technik, Wirtschaft: Die Modernen Wissenschaften Und Die Konstruktion Der ' Industriellen Gesellschaft. ' In Wirtschaftsgeschichte Als Kulturgeschichte: Dimensionen Eines Perspektivwechsels , edited by H. Bergho /uniFB00 and J. Vogel, 295 -323. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 2004.

Weber, W. ' MehrTechnik um die Kuh -weniger Stunden im Stall. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 166, no. 5 (1976): 12.

Wehler, H.-U. Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte, Vol. 5: Von Der Gründung Der Beiden Deutschen Staaten Bis Zur Vereinigung 1949 -1990 . Munich: C.H. Beck, 2006.

Welskopp. Unternehmen Praxisgeschichte: Historische Perspektiven Auf Kapitalismus, Arbeit Und Klassengesellschaft . Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2014.

Wilke, G. ' Gefragt sind gut melkbare Euter. Ein erster Untersuchungsbericht -Für die Praxis von großer Bedeutung. ' Bayerisches Landwirtschaftliches Wochenblatt 150, no. 46 (1960): 15. Windhorst, H.-W. ' Industrialisierungsprozesse in Der Agrarwirtschaft Der Bundesrepublik Deutschland Und Der Vereinigten Staaten. ' Vechtaer Arbeiten Zur Geographie Und Regionalwissenschaft 8 (1989): 11 -32.

Witt, M. Max-Planck-Institut Für Tierzucht Und Tierernährung Mariensee . Neustadt: Dokumentationsstelle Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, 1967.