## Craft  Labor  and  Mechanization in Nineteenth-Century American Canning

## MARTIN  BROWN  AND  PETER  PHILIPS

The  development  of  new  machinery  in  nineteenth-century  American  canning followed two paths. Automative, labor-saving devices were developed to replace labor  in  unskilled  tasks  while  deskilling,  human-capital-saving  machinery  was designed to make craft labor more replaceable. Cannery operators appear to have focused  on deskilling machinery as  the  key  to greater managerial control over production. Craft  workers through organizational power and pressing for higher wages  seem  to  have  stimulated  the  early  and  sustained  search  for  deskilling machinery.  Because  human-capital-saving machinery  allowed  wage  cuts,  they could be adopted prior to their being used as labor-saving devices.

W e  present  here  a  case  study  of  technological  innovation  and diffusion. Firms  in  the  post-Civil  War  American canned-food industry  made  substantial  profits  because  of  rapidly  growing  demand. However,  cannery  operators  saw  their  potential  profits increasingly distributed  as rents  to owners  of factor  inputs. In the case of the  labor input, the bargaining leverage of craft  workers, rooted in their ability to exercise substantial control  over  the  production  process,  not  only earned  these  workers  high  rents  but  also  limited  the  flexibility  of cannery  operators  to make  production  decisions  which  might  enhance future  as well as current  profits.

In response to the problems of craft labor, cannery operators pursued a policy of technical innovation and diffusion  designed to reduce worker control over production decisions. The nature of craft power meant that craft  workers  had both the means and  motivation to resist  the  strategy of  technical  innovation.  Ironically,  the  intensity  of  craft-worker  resistance  to  technical  innovation  increased  the  expected  payoff  of  the strategy to cannery owners. Broader market forces  triggered  the  emergence  of  a  cannery  capital-goods  industry  whose  existence  enhanced the economic viability  of technical  innovation.

Skill  and  secret  knowledge  formed  the  basis  for  craft bargaining power  in  the  early  American  canning  industry.   The  two  key 1 craft

Journal  of  Economic  History, Vol.  XLVI,  No.  3  (Sept. 1986).  '  The  Economic  History Association. All rights reserved.  ISSN 0022-0507.

The authors are Martin Brown, Assistant Professor of Economics, Howard University and Peter Philips, Assistant  Professor  of Economics,  University of  Utah.

1 While  there  are  a  number  of  industry  sources  giving  brief  histories  of  the  emergence  of American  canning,  the only  scholarly  source  is  Edward  F.  Keuchel,  "The  Development  of  the Canning Industry  in New York State to  1960" (Ph.D. diss., Cornell  University,  1970). The most widely available  industry  source is Earl  Chapin  May, The Canning Clan (New York,  1937). The most useful  industry source is Arthur I. Judge, ed., A History of the Canning Industry by its Most Prominent Men (Baltimore,  1913).

occupations in the post-Civil War canneries were capping and processing. After  produce had been worked up and put into cans by piece-rate, unskilled,  and  mainly  female  hand  labor,  the  cans  were  sealed  by cappers,  who  were  specialized  tinsmiths.  Processors,  in  turn,  cooked the  sealed  cans  in  water  or  a steam  bath  before  the  unskilled  tasks  of cooling,  labeling,  boxing,  and  warehousing  of  the  canned  goods  (see Table  1).

With demand for canned goods expanding traditional technology  and slow growth  in the  supply  of processors and cappers,  skilled  workmen were in a position to capture some of the cannery owners' profits  in the form of premium wages. The growing ability of craft workers to capture such rents was reflected  in the decreasing ratio of value-added to wages in the  early  years  of  the  American  canning  industry.  In  1860 this  ratio stood  at 4.97, but  by  1880 it had fallen  to 2.07. 2

The ability of craft  workers to collect these rents was a function  of the scarcity of craft  labor. Skilled processing labor was kept scarce because the art of processing was  secret knowledge  carefully guarded  by processing craftsmen.  The art of processing hermetically-sealed  cans of food  stemmed  from  the  experiments  of  manufacturers  beginning  with Nicolas  Appert  around  1810.  Why  this  technique  was  successful  in processing  foods  was  poorly  understood  and  subject  to  common  but unanticipated failures.  A canner's ability to acquire and hold customers 3 depended  on  reputation.  As  longer  and  safer  cook  times  generally resulted in more  food deterioration, the processor  had  a tradeoff between  safety  and  quality  with  an  uncertain  understanding  of  the technical  relationship  between  the  two.  Either  the  proprietor  did  the

2 Ratios  of  value  added  to  wages,  raw  materials,  and  capital  describe  the  diffusion of  an increasingly  capital-intensive,  labor-saving and  materials-neutral  technology  after  the  1880s. The ratio of value added to production-line wages, which fell from  1860 to 1880 (4.97 to 2.07), generally rose after  1880 (2.07 to 3.13 in 1919) indicating a relative easing of wage costs. In contrast, the ratio of  value  added  to  materials  cost,  largely raw  produce,  was  roughly  constant  from  1890 to  1919, suggesting rising material  flow-through  per worker with  mechanization.  The ratio of the  stock of capital to value added fell from  1870 to 1880 suggesting a rapid diffusion  of pressure cookers. The ratio does not again fall, in the aggregate, until after  1900 indicating that the new technologies which were introduced in preparation and capping in the mid-1880s in Baltimore were only in national use some  15  years  later.  U.S.  Census  Bureau,  Eighth  Census, 1860, Manufactures  of  the U.S. (Washington,  D.C.,  1865), pp.  29, 230, 255, 351, 417, 542; U.S. Census  Bureau,  Ninth  Census, 1870, Vol. Ill, Wealth and Industry (Washington, D.C. 1872), p. 395; U.S. Census Bureau, Twelfth Census, 1900, Manufactures, Part  1, "United States by Industry" (Washington, D.C,  1902), p. 8; U.S.  Census  Bureau,  Thirteenth  Census,  1910, Vol.  10, Manufactures,  1909, (Washington,  D.C. 1913), p. 383; U.S. Census Bureau, Census of Manufactures,  1914, Vol. II, "Reports for  Selected Industries" (Washington,  D.C,  1919), p. 365.

3 W.  Lyman  Underwood,  "Incidents in the Canning  Industry  of  New  England,"  in A.  Judge, History of the Canning Trade, p.  13. Underwood was a professor at MIT in the 1890s and a relative of the first American  canner,  William  Underwood.  Lyman  Underwood  along with S. C.  Prescott helped pioneer university study of the canning processing techniques. The mid-1890s saw the first American  scientific  study of why the canning process worked.

processing, or he relied  on the experience and judgment  of the processor. 4

Processors  were  the  highest-paid  cannery  workers  (see  Table  1). Would-be  canners  tried  to  buy  the  processor's  secrets  as  one  of  the start-up costs of business. In  1867, one cannery  owner  paid  $5,000 (20 to 25 percent of the total capital costs of an average cannery at the time) to acquire the pack time and temperature along with associated  secrets from  a  respected  processor.   Often,  new  cannery  operators  had  been 5 processors. But there is no evidence of anyone, prior to 1874, selling the processor's  knowledge to the public at large.

Both the  processor  and  the  informed  cannery  owner  exploited  their secret  knowledge.  The  processor  rented  out  the  current  value  of  his knowledge through  a higher wage and passed  on his proprietal  knowledge either  by  sale  or family  inheritance.  The  canner  who bought  this knowledge made good  his investment through  the better  quality  of his product. In principle, a processor could have written and sold a canning manual and reaped his reward through book sales. The fact that this did not occur until the  1890s is probably due to the risks canners may have attached to buying information  from an untested source. Also, as it was easy  to  copy  or  repeat  information  found  in a book,  it  was  difficult  to profit  from  one's  secrets  by  publishing  them.   In  any  case,  by  1874, 6 despite the absence of an entrepreneur  publishing the secrets of the art of canning, the  secrets  of the processor  began to be sold to the public. But the purveyor  of knowledge  was not a person; it was the  emerging capital-goods  industry.

The  technique  of  pressurized  cooking  to  superheat  foods  had  been known in France since the early 1850s.  In 1874 Shriver's kettle was first 7 produced  and  sold  in  the  United  States  to  superheat  packs  through pressurized  cooking.  The  reason for  the  slow diffusion  of the  pressure cooker  is  uncertain.  However,  the  rapid  growth  in  American  canning after  1860 was a necessary  condition for  the emergence  of the  canning capital-goods industry.  With the development of the pressure cooker in the  1870s,  inventive  effort began  to  shift  from  the  cannery  and  the proprietorial  and  secretive  perspectives  of  cannery  owners  and  craft workers to firms specializing in the production and sale of capital goods.

Unlike  the  processor  and  canner,  marketers  of  pressure  cookers could  profit  from  their  product  only  by  selling  the  instructions  needed

- 4 Hugh S. Orem, "Baltimore Master of the Art of Canning," in A. Judge, History of the Canning Trade, p. 10.

b Daily  plant  capacity  in  1865 was 5,000 cans; in  1894 it was 40,000 cans. Source: U.S. Commissioner of Labor, Eleventh  Annual  Report, "Hand  and Machine Labor"  (Washington,  D.C., 1898), vol. 2, pp. 1078-79.

| Cans per Cent of  Labor  Cost                                | 267 3.5 160 267 35 100 40 133 57   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Cans per Worker 40,000 444 20,000 20,000                     | 5,000 20,000 5,000 20,000 10,000   |
| Average Wage $1.50 1.25 1.25 0.75                            | 1.44 2.00 1.25 1.50 1.75           |
| 200 5,000 5,000 Cans per Cent of  Labor  Cost 25 1.6 13.3 50 | 17 14 33 33 40                     |
| Average Wage $2.00 1.25 1.00 3.00 3.50                       |                                    |
| 1.25 Cans per Worker 5,000 1,667 5,000                       | 2,500 5,000 5,000                  |
|                                                              | 0.75 1.50 1.25                     |
| Number, Sex IM 25F 3F IF IM IM                               | 2F IM IM                           |
| Scalder" Wiper Cookroom Capper" Cooker" Warehousing          | Labeler Nailer                     |
| Preparation Peeler Packer"                                   | Trucker                            |

for  its  operation.  Customers  buying  pressure  cookers  had  to  pay  the additional  price  for  information  which  specified  appropriate  cooking times for various products even if they managed to get these recipes by word of mouth. Because instructions for  pressure cookers were not  as easily copied as recipes in a book, early manufacturers  were the first to expect profits from  public sale of canning secrets. Consequently,  these companies  gathered,  bought,  and  developed  what  information they could regarding pack time and temperature by crop. The dissemination of  processing  knowledge  in  effect  lifted  the  constraints  that  had  been placed  on the  supply of qualified  processing  labor.

The capper was also a skilled workman in short supply. The capper's tasks were complex and strategic. During the packing season, once the produce  had been worked  up and put into cans, the capper sealed  tins shut with a soldering iron. When prepared and put into open cans, food was highly perishable. Cannery operators were, therefore, quite vulnerable  to  quick,  unannounced  strikes  by  cappers.  James  D.  Cox,  the inventor of an  1887 device designed to deskill the capping step, recalled of this premechanized  period:

. . . in those days, the capping all having to be done by hand, a Boss-Capper  took  the contract to do the work, furnishing  his men for the purpose, and even the owner stood in great awe of him, for of what use was it to purchase tomatoes and prepare them,  if, at the important moment, the Capper decided he would go on strike; or having received his pay, required  more time to sober up than the boss thought necessary. He knew his importance and he used his advantage to the full, and to the too frequent  annoyance and heavy loss of the canner. It was this helplessness of the canner that made him a willing advocate  of  every  mechanical  means,  and  made  possible  the  working  out,  through frequent  failures  and  heavy  losses,  the  perfected  mechanical  means  now  in  use.  The Boss-Capper  helped  hasten  the  day  of  his own  exit  through  his overbearing  thoughtlessness. 8

Capping machines, however, were not easily introduced  to solve the problem  of  the  boss  capper.  The  task  of  capping  was sufficiently complex  to  make  its  mechanization  difficult. Furthermore,  cappers resisted  mechanizing  efforts.  Edward  Judge, editor  of the first canning industry  trade  journal  which  was  founded in 1878,  noted  that  the cannery  owner  had  to be  sensitive  to  shop-floor  power  relationships  if he hoped  to introduce new machinery  peacefully:

8 James  D. Cox,  "The  Evolution  of Tomato  Canning Machinery,"  in A. Judge History of  the Canning Industry, p. 83. Cox's  recollections are shared by A.  H. F. Going who was a Baltimore cannery  owner  from  1864 to  1899. In  1899 he  recalled  that  the  Can  Makers  Mutual  Protective Association  was formed  around  1870 for  the  purpose  of  raising  wages. Journeymen  can  makers through  organized  demands  pushed  wages  up  over  100  percent.  "But  finally  machinery  commenced to assert itself in the manufacture of cans, on account of the frequency of these strikes and on account of the strength of this combination. Men became restive under these influences and the manufacturer  of cans commenced figuring to get away from  being dictated to by his employees." U.S. Industrial Commission, Preliminary Report on Trusts and Combinations (Washington, D.C., 1900), vol.  1, p. 919.

When a capping machine came out [in the early 1880s] to do this capping expeditiously and  mechanically  the boss cappers put their  condemnation  upon it; and  it was almost impossible  to find anyone  who  would dare  to work upon  or with the  machine.  When, however, an improved capping iron came out which the boss capper could furnish  to his employees  in  hand  work,  as  it  increased  his pay  without  increasing  that  of  the  hands who used it, it was rapidly  adopted.  . .  . 9

Thus,  the  boss  capper  sought  to  restrict  the  kinds  of  machines  introduced in order to protect and enhance his position within the  shop-floor hierarchy.

In the  1870s and  1880s cannery owners  sought to alter the  conditions of capping  labor supply to  their advantage  by  instituting internal labor-contracting  systems.  By  employing  the  boss  capper  through  a service  contract,  canners  hoped  to  pass  on  to  the  lead  capper  the problems  of  capping.  These  problems  included  not  only  the  technical considerations  of  organizing  the  capping  of  cans,  but  the  managerial consideration  of  keeping  other  cappers  steadily  and  busily  at  work during  the  peak  season.  However,  because  the  boss  capper  would flip-flop between  the  roles  of supervisor  and  union leader,  the  cannery owner  was  continually uncertain  as  to  whether  the  capper would enforce contracted  output  quotas  or  lead  his  men  out  on  strike  in violation  of  his  contract.  In  the  end,  the'expedient  of  internal  labor contracting required that future  revenues would have to be increasingly shared with  skilled  cappers.  A few boss cappers took  the contracts  for many  canneries  in  Baltimore  in  the  late  1870s. 10 By  stimulating  the occupational organization of cappers across several firms, internal labor contracting  helped  trigger  the  development  of  capper  craft unions. During the  1870s and  1880s the Can Makers Mutual Protection Association  in  Baltimore  was  representing  cappers  working  in  the major canneries  of  the  area.  This  craft  association  enhanced  the  bargaining power of the lead  capper  as an oligopolistic  supplier of labor.  Thus, in seeking  to  improve  internal  labor-supply  conditions,  employers  inadvertently worsened their position with respect to the external supply of skilled  labor.

One  solution  could  have  been  to  train  more  cappers. On-the-job training might have been difficult  due to the resistance of in-place  craft labor. Still, an experienced  capper could have been hired to run a trade school.  However,  if these  newly-trained  cappers  were  not  hired,  they were not likely to remain in the local area as an unpaid but useful  threat to  in-place  craftworkers.  The  general  character  of  the  capper's  skills meant  owners  were  unlikely to pay  the  training  costs  of workers  who might  go  elsewhere. Lesser-paid workers conceivably could have

financed  their  own  training  perhaps  under  the  auspices  of  employer groups.  However,  the  market  responded  with  the  emergence  of  a capital-goods  sector  rather  than  vocational  training.  What  appeared needed  was  an  affordable and  workable  machine  which  would  not necessarily replace labor in the capping of cans, but would, by lowering the  skill  requirements  of this  task,  make  cappers  more  easily  replaceable  from  the  general  pool  of  unskilled  labor  and  consequently  force down wages.

By the  1880s, the existence  of a cannery  capital-goods  sector,  made possible  by  the growing  scale of the canning  industry  and  the  demand for  the  pressure  cooker,  demonstrated  to would-be independent  inventors the potential for  an economic payoff  to anyone who could  develop an effective  and reasonably-priced  capping machine. With boss cappers at the height of their power, the potential demand for such an innovation was high, even if cannery operators and canners alike estimated that the technical barriers were  formidable. The  man  who  successfully responded  to  this  demand  was  J.  D.  Cox.  Cox's  capper,  when  first introduced,  did  not raise the physical  productivity  of the capper at  all. But,  it  was  still  successful  because  cannery  operators  could  use  it  to undermine  the  power  of  the  capper. 11 As  in  the  case  of  the  pressure cooker,  adoption  of  Cox's  capper  and  subsequent  capping  machines soon resulted  in  substantial  reduction  in the  wages of cappers.

In  contrast  to  the  pressure  cooker  and  capping  machine,  devices which  mechanized  unskilled floor-labor  tasks  had  to  significantly  raise labor  productivity.  Floor  labor  was  scarce  in  the  sense  that  workers were not always forthcoming  at the right time and at traditional wages. Seasonal  scarcity  put  an  upward  pressure  on  unskilled  wages  which were the largest part of the canner's overall wage bill. Furthermore, the capacity requirements of newly-introduced  cookroom  machinery exacerbated  the  problem  of  scarce  seasonal  labor  supplies.  Short  of  an organized  attempt  to  recruit  labor  from other  areas,  the  supply  of potential  labor  for  unskilled  cannery  jobs  was  fixed,  upward  sloping, and  equal to the overall  area's  labor  supply.

Some canneries, particularly in rural areas, did try labor  recruitment tactics. 12 The  solution  was  short  term  and  usually  affected  only  rural canneries. In urban areas canneries which recruited labor were likely to lose  their  recruits  to  less  seasonal  industries.  In  contrast,  the  newly emerging machine-goods industry could offer  "iron slaves" which could not run away. However, to solve the problem of scarce unskilled labor, efforts  to  mechanize  preparation,  labeling,  and  boxing tasks  could  not focus on lowering required labor skills. To succeed, they actually had to

replace unskilled  labor with machinery  by raising unit labor  productivity.  The introduction  of the automatic labeler  is instructive.

Hand  labeling  was  an  unskilled piece-rate  job, usually done  by low-paid  women  workers.  In  1884  an  Englishman  named Hutchins introduced a labeling machine to Baltimore canners. However,  Edward Judge noted the labeling machines could not outperform  hand labor and consequently,  were not adopted.  The difficulty  with early  labelers  was the  glue. After  continuous  use, the glue gummed  up the machines  and required  frequent shut-downs  for  cleaning.  When  the  Knapp  labeler solved  the glue  problem  in  1893, it succeeded  in raising  physical  labor productivity  for  labeling.  After  this  improvement,  according  to Judge, mechanical labeling  "forever  distanced  all hand competition that might arise." 13 In  contrast  to  Cox's  capper,  which  was  introduced  before  it could  raise unit  labor  productivity,  labeling  machines  were  not  widely used  until they  could  raise  output  per worker  significantly.

Thus,  the  standard  for  adopting  new  machinery  differed.  The  lower productivity  requirements  required  of  deskilling  machinery  may  have speeded  their  introduction  and  diffusion.  The  higher  productivity  requirements  of  automative machinery  aimed  at  lesser-skilled tasks, ceteris  paribus,  may  have  made  their  successful development  more difficult.  In either  case, machinery adopted between  1880 and  1920 had to lower unit labor costs and also total factor costs if profits  were to be enhanced  by innovation.  The profitability  of a new machine  depended on  the  machinery's  cost,  its  use  of  material  inputs,  and  its  expected depreciation  rate  as  well  as  what  it did  to labor  productivity.  Lacking data on physical depreciation, we assume that widely-adopted  machines were  profitable  and  met  these additional  criteria. 14 Here,  however,  we are  concerned  with  documenting  how  new  machinery  affected labor requirements and eased the constraints different  kinds of labor imposed on  management.

Data exist which corroborate the testimony of contemporary  observers  that  craft  machines  initially  deskilled  labor  while  floor-labor  machines displaced labor. Table 1 shows a tomato cannery in 1865 prior to mechanization  and  in  1894 after  the pressure  cooker  of the late  1870s, the  capper  of  the  mid-1880s,  and  various  preparation  machines  of  the 1880s and  1890s had been introduced. With the exception of the cooker, the  new machines  were first introduced  between  1885 and  1895.

- 13 Edward  S. Judge, "The  Past,  Present and  Future of the Canning Industry,"  p. 56.
- 14 An indirect indication of the profits derived from cannery mechanization by cutting labor costs can be seen in census data. After  1880 both the ratios of value added to salaries and clerical wages, value  added  to  materials  and  value  added  to  capital  stock  hold  constant  or  fall  up  to  1920. In contrast, the ratio of value added to production line wages steadily rises. This suggests that through the period when continuous flow, craft deskilling, mechanical line production was developed in the canneries, labor  savings  along  the  production  line were the primary  source of  new  revenues  for profits.  See fn.  2.

## Craft Labor and Mechanization

TABLE  2 PHYSICAL-LABOR PRODUCTIVITY GAINS AND UNIT-LABOR COST SAVINGS ASSOCIATED WITH MECHANIZATION OF A TOMATO CANNERY,  1865-1894

| Occupation   | Proportionate Change in Physical Labor  Productivity 1894/1865   | Proportionate Change in Unit Labor Costs 1894/1865   |
|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Preparation  |                                                                  |                                                      |
| Scalder*     | 8                                                                | .10.6                                                |
| Peeler       | 2                                                                | 2                                                    |
| Packer"      | 12                                                               | 5.3                                                  |
| Wiper        | 4                                                                | 12                                                   |
| Cookroom     |                                                                  |                                                      |
| Capper   2   | 1                                                                | 2.1                                                  |
| Cooker   3   | 4                                                                | 7                                                    |
| Warehousing  |                                                                  |                                                      |
| Labeler      | 2                                                                | 1.2                                                  |
| Nailer       | 4                                                                | 4                                                    |
| Trucker      | 2                                                                | 1.4                                                  |

Source: Table 1.

First,  note  that  cans  per  worker  per  day  of  operation  rose  for  all mechanized preparation tasks. Mechanization of packing resulted in the replacement  of  low-wage  female  hand  workers  by  higher-wage  male machine operators. But savings on unit labor costs were still substantial due  to  the  large  increase  in  physical  labor  productivity.  While  not apparent  from  a  single  cannery,  a  similar  process  occurred  in  other initially female noncraft occupations such as peeling and cutting in other canneries (see Table 3). Mechanization made it possible to pay scalders, who were semi-craft  male workers, a somewhat  lower wage. Thus  the unit labor cost improved even more than physical labor productivity in scalding. The physical labor productivity  of unmechanized  preparation and warehousing also increased due to economies associated with larger plant  size.  For  truckers  and  peelers  increases  doubled,  and  for  nailers and wipers they  quadrupled  (see Table 2).

Second, note that the two deskilled craft occupations in the cookroom showed relatively little increase in physical productivity. Using machinery first developed  in the  1870s, cookers  in the mid-1890s still had  not increased  their  individual  physical  labor  productivities  more  than  four times above the mark achieved in 1865, a factor increase comparable to that  achieved  for  nonmechanized  tasks.  Cappers,  using  more  recently invented  machinery  from  the  late  1880s, had  yet  to  improve  upon  the cans-per-day outputs associated with craft production in 1865 (see Table 2). Thus, while the mechanization of some floor-labor tasks  significantly raised  physical labor productivity,  mechanized  craft-labor  occupations did not achieve productivity  gains which could better  the gains associated with the floor-labor occupations  which remained  unmechanized.

## Brown and Philips

## PHYSICAL-LABOR  PRODUCTIVITY GAINS AND UNIT-LABOR COST SAVINGS ASSOCIATED WITH MECHANIZATION  IN SEVEN FRUIT AND VEGETABLE CANNERIES,  1860s-1890s

TABLE 3

| Occupation                       | Average  Proportionate Increase  in Physical Labor  Productivity 1890s/1860s   | Average  Proportionate Decline in Unit  Labor Cost  1860s/1890s   |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Husker, parer,  packer,  peeler" | 1.7                                                                            | 2.1                                                               |
|                                  | (0.7)                                                                          | (1.4)                                                             |
| Peeler,  cutter*                 | 52.3                                                                           | 36.6                                                              |
|                                  | (44.8)                                                                         | (22.7)                                                            |
| Packer"                          | 9.9                                                                            | 8.1                                                               |
|                                  | (2.1)                                                                          | (2.9)                                                             |
| Capper"                          | 2.5                                                                            | 4.5                                                               |
|                                  | (1.3)                                                                          | (2.5)                                                             |
| Cooker"                          | 5.1                                                                            | 7.6                                                               |
| Cooker"                          | (3.2)                                                                          | (4.7)                                                             |

Note: Standard  deviations are in  parentheses.

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Commissioner of Labor, Eleventh Annual Report, "Hand and Machine Labor"  (Washington,  D.C.,  1898), vol. 2, pp. 1068-83.

Despite  the  very  different physical  effects on  labor productivity associated  with  craft  and  floor  mechanization,  both  forms  of  innovations cut unit labor costs and presumably unit total factor costs as well. By  1894, cooking  machines, which  had  been around  for  twenty  years, cut  average  wages  among processors  from  $3.50 to $2.00 per  day  and replaced  skilled  adult  males with less-skilled  men and  boys. The  more recently introduced  capping machines cut average wages from  $3.00 to $1.44 using  a  combination  of men  and  boys. Thus,  floor-labor  mechanization cut unit labor costs by raising physical labor productivity while craft  mechanization,  at  least  in  the  short  run,  cut  unit  labor  costs  by lowering wages. Later improvements would significantly  raise physical labor  productivity  even  in  craft  occupations,  but  this  took  years  to achieve. 15

The foregoing  discussion  can be restated  into a hypothesis  regarding the initial impact of mechanization on floor and craft  labor  occupations

15 Edward S. Judge, "The Past, Present and Future of the Canning Industry," p. 56. These data for one tomato cannery are consistent with the recollections of the Canning Trade editor,  Edward Judge. When Judge stated that Cox's cappers could do no more work than the "ordinary man" but when  "properly  served  and  operated"  cut  capping  costs  by  "about  one-third,"  Judge  was confirming  the findings in Tables  1  and 2. Capper productivity, if anything, remains constant  after mechanization, but because wages fell from $3.00 to $1.44 per day, total unit costs (allowing for the cost  and durability  of Cox's  capper) probably fell  by Judge's assertion of  "about  one-third."  An 1885 Maryland report on the effects  of can-making machinery on wages and productivity  is also consistent  with these  data for  one tomato cannery.  Maryland  Bureau  of  Industrial  Statistics  and Information, First Biennial Report,  1884-1885 (Baltimore,  1886), p. 74.

in canning and applied  to the histories  of seven distinct  canneries.  We would  expect  that  for  mechanized  floor-labor tasks,  physical  labor productivity  would  rise  significantly  while  in craft  occupations,  mechanization would not initially bring about large increases in physical labor productivity. By  the 1890s,  pressure  cookers  adopted  in  the  1870s should  show  greater  labor  productivity  gains  than  capping  machines invented in the  1880s. Capping machines in the  1890s would show little labor  productivity  gains  over  nonmechanized  tasks  because  machine developers should have had little time to improve cappers from  humancapital-saving  machinery  into  labor-saving  machinery.  However,  in craft  occupations  we  would  expect  unit  labor  costs  to  show  greater improvements  than  those  allowed  by  meager  gains  in  physical  labor productivity  due to wage declines associated with deskilling.  For floor labor tasks we would expect the opposite as machinery may have been skill neutral or even skill enhancing leading to constant or higher wages in these tasks  after  mechanization.

These propositions can be tested using data for mechanized  canneries between  1865 and  1896. The firms include two corn canneries, two pea canneries, one pineapple cannery, and two tomato canneries  (including that in Table 1). Table 3 presents the average proportionate increases in physical  labor  productivity  and  proportionate  decreases  in  unit  labor costs in four general cannery occupations  which were mechanized.  For comparison, it also includes  unskilled  preparation  work which was not mechanized. In the two unskilled, mechanized  tasks labor  productivity rose  significantly  while  in the two craft  occupations  labor  productivity rose  by  much  smaller  amounts.  The  wide  standard  deviations  around the  averages  for  peeling  and  cutting  are  due  to  the  distinctly  different technical aspects associated  with peeling tomatoes, cutting pineapples, podding peas, and shucking corn. In both unskilled cases improvements in unit labor costs were less than rises in physical labor productivity due to wage increases associated with mechanization. The reverse held true in  the  craft  occupations  of  capping  and  cooking  where  wage  declines associated  with deskilling allowed  improvements  in unit labor  costs  to exceed  modest  gains  in  physical labor productivity. The  gains  in capping  labor  productivity  are  similar  to  gains  in  labor  productivity found  in unskilled and unmechanized  preparation  tasks shown in Table 3.  Productivity  gains  in these  unmechanized,  unskilled  tasks  are  probably  associated  with  scale  economies  and  learned  organizational  improvements  associated  with  the  development  of  the  industry  between 1870 and  1890. Unmechanized productivity improvements set a baseline for  judging  observed  labor  productivity  gains  in  the  cookroom.  The argument  we  present  is  not  that  deskilling  machines  would never become labor enhancing. Rather,  we hypothesize that when a machine can  cut  wages  through  deskilling,  this  skill-saving  machine  may  be introduced  before  its  perfection  as  a  labor-saving  device.  The  use  of

deskilling devices which are not labor saving will usually be short-lived because typically it will still pay the employer or capital-goods  industry to  perfect  later  generations  of the machine into a labor-savings  device. The  tomato  cannery  in Tables  1 and  2 which  shows  no labor  productivity gains in capping is not an exception to this process, but rather an example of early adoption  when wages have been cut but simple  labor productivity  has not been enhanced. Table 3 also reflects this dynamic. Assuming  the  average  labor  productivity  gain  for  capping  is  in  fact greater  than  the  baseline  set by  unmechanized  tasks,  a  slight  increase should  be associated  with improvements  in the capper  in the ten  years since its adoption. The greater gains of the cooker reflect the fact that it has been  on line twenty  years. The cooker is still less labor  enhancing than  any  of  the  more  recent machinery  in unskilled  preparation  work. Thus,  evidence  from  these  seven  canneries  is  consistent  with  our hypothesis that for a machine to be adopted in the high-wage cookroom, it was sufficient  that the machine cut wages through deskilling (assuming appropriate initial machine costs and depreciation figures). However, in low-wage  occupations  a  necessary  condition  for  the  adoption  of  new machinery  was that  it be labor  enhancing.

The effect  of mechanization  on craft  unionism can be traced  through the records on strikes and  wages  of  can makers  and  cappers  in Baltimore  from 1870  to 1900.  The  Can  Makers  Mutual  Protection Association was  formed around 1870  and, according  to employer recollections,  the  worker  combination  was  often  successful  in  raising wages. 16 Maryland's Bureau of Statistics and Information reports Baltimore-area  strikes  after  1881. In  1881 there  were  two  can  makers and  cappers  strikes  involving  300 workers  and  forcing  wages  up  from $1.20 per day to $1.50 and then $1.83 per day. In  1883 a similar pattern is reported. Three strikes involving around 600 workers drove wages up from  an  early-season  rate  of $1.20 to  an  end-of-season  $1.87 per  day. Three  strikes  in  1885 drove the  piece  rate  up  from  $0.25 per  hundred cans  in  May  to  $0.60  per  hundred  cans  at  the  end  of  the  season  in October,  about  the  time  that  capping  machines  were first being  introduced.  In  1886 the only reported  strike was at a firm attempting to pay below-industry  wage  levels. Workers  were  successful  at  regaining  the industry  wage.

In  the  reports  of  1892,  1899,  and 1901  no  can  makers  strikes  are reported although other industries experienced  strikes. One can makers strike is reported for 1895.  Workers struck in October  against  a reduction  from  $0.25  to  $0.15 per  hundred  cans  and  lost.  In  contrast,

16 The  beginnings  of  the  Can  Makers  Mutual  Protection  Association  in  1870  is  suggested  in Baltimore Federation of Labor, Illustrated  History of the  Baltimore  Federation  of  Labor (Baltimore,  1900), p. 440 and in the  U.S. Industrial Commission, Trusts and Industrial Combinations (Washington,  D.C.  1900), vol.  1, p. 919.

during  the  mid-1880s  October,  the  peak  season  and  the  high  point  of worker  bargaining  power,  piece  rates  were  driven  from $0.25  per hundred up to $0.60 per hundred cans. In  1902 the Can Makers  Union Local  211 of  Baltimore  reported  no  strikes  but  a  wage  decrease  of 50 cents per day. Out of 72  unions reporting, only three, including the can makers,  reported wage  declines  in 1902  while  33  unions reported increases. 17 These  data  concur  with  a picture  of  union  decline  due  to mechanization  as told by the can makers and cappers, themselves. By 1900  the  Can  Makers  Mutual  Protection  Association  had  joined  the AFL. Its  "object  was to revive the use of hand-made  tin cans  so as to open an opportunity  to permit adults to work instead of the major  part of  all  labor  performed  about  the  machine  being  done  by  women  and children  at  utterly  inadequate  and  irregular  wages.  .  .  ." 18 In  1900,  a labor representative told the Industrial Commission that in the  1880s in the  canning  industry  "We  had  an  assembly  at  that  time,  before  the machines were introduced, of 1,100 or 1,200 men.  . . . What was called 'jumpers' were introduced, that is, the manufacture  of cans by machinery,  and  it  really  destroyed  the  assembly.  .  .  ." I 9 That  this  was  precisely  what  the  employers  had  in  mind  when  they  adopted  capping machinery fifteen  years earlier is suggested in an 1887 advertisement  for Cox's Capper which boasted: "Why Cap Longer by Old Methods when Cox's Capper Fills the Bill-It Saves Labor-It Saves Solder-It Never Tires-It Never  Strikes." 20

We contend that in nineteenth-century American canning, innovative mechanization  enhanced  the profitability  of firms in a growing  product market  through  two  distinct  mechanisms.  One  type  of  mechanization, which appears to have taken precedence in the innovative  strategies of cannery  operators,  was  designed  to  reduce  the  extent  of  control  that craft  workers  enjoyed  over  the  production  process.  The  primary  positive impacts of this type of mechanization on profitability  were achieved by  allowing  for  redivision  of  labor.  Consequently,  it  both  reduced  the

17 Maryland Bureau  of  Statistics  and  Information, First Biennial Report, p.  207; Maryland, Bureau  of Statistics  and Information, Second Biennial Report, (Annapolis,  1888),  pp.  60-62, 75; Maryland  Bureau  of Statistics  and Information, First Annual Report, 1892 (Baltimore,  1893), p. 200.  The First Annual Report states:  "The  year  1892  will  long  be remembered  in labor  circles as being  prolific  of strikes  and lockouts  . . . " yet no can maker  and capper  strikes  were  reported. Maryland  Bureau  of Statistics  and Information, Third  Annual Report, 1894 (Baltimore,  1895), p. 172;  Maryland Bureau  of  Statistics  and Information, Fourth Annual Report, 1895 ( Baltimore, 1896),  p.  169; Maryland Bureau of  Statistics and  Information, Eighth Annual Report, 1899 (Baltimore,  1900), p.  1; Maryland  Bureau  of Statistics and  Information, Ninth Annual Report, 1900 (Baltimore,  1901),  p.  16;  Maryland  Bureau  of Statistics  and Information, Tenth Annual Report, 1901 (Baltimore,  1902), pp.  12-13; Maryland  Bureau  of Statistics  and Information, Eleventh Annual Report, 1902 ( Baltimore,  1903), p.  52. The  union  and  nonunion  can  makers  wages  were  reported to be  the same  in  1902.

- 18 Baltimore  Federation  of Labor, Illustrated History, p. 440.
- 19 U.S.  Industrial  Commission, Capital and Labor (Washington,  D.C.,  1902),  vol.  7, p.  431.
- 20 Reprinted  in Food Production Management, 101  (July  1978),  p.  70.

social  power  of  craft  labor  as a constraint  on  profit-maximizing  managerial decisions and it allowed employment of a lower-wage work force in  formerly craft occupations.  The  second  innovative  strategy  was aimed  at  the  problem of unreliable seasonal supplies of unskilled workers.  This  type  of  mechanization  increased  profitability  by  greatly increasing  the  throughput  of  product  per  worker.  Because different barriers  to profitability  were solved through mechanization,  criteria  for their  adoption  were  different.

The  success  of  innovative  strategies  was  not  inevitable  but  was contingent  upon  favorable circumstances  regarding  the  relationship between  capital  costs,  wages,  and  productivity.  The  constellation  of these  circumstances  could  not  have  been  foreseen  perfectly  by  either the  cannery  operators  or  craft  workers,  and  each  side  undoubtedly made  experimental  decisions  in  an  atmosphere  of  uncertainty.  The historical account  suggests that cannery craft  workers overplayed  their hand  and  probably  contributed to  a  more  rapid  pace  of  technical innovation.  The  expectations  of  craft  workers  were  probably  shortsighted  because  their  substantial  degree  of  control  over production decisions made  it  hard to  imagine how  their advantageous social position  could be effectively  eroded  by as yet developed  machinery.  It was difficult  for craft  workers to anticipate how overall industry growth would result in the emergence of a cannery capital-goods industry. The emergence  of  the  capital-goods  sector,  of  course,  contributed  to  the success  of  the  innovative  strategy  of  the  cannery  owners  because  it became the source of better and cheaper mechanical innovations. High growth rate in the canning industry also contributed to the success of the skill-displacing strategy because the power of craft unions (as well as the informal  craft  power  of  nonunion  craft  workers)  eroded  through  the entrance  of  new  nonunion  firms,  employing  the  new  technology.  This made it easier  to  lower  craft  wages as new technology  was  introduced and so contributed  to investment returns in skill-displacing  technology.

Thus, the circumstances  which  favored innovative strategies in nineteenth-century  American  canning  were  not  solely  the  creation  of managerial  initiative  but  were also the product  of industry-wide  developments  in  which  the  broad  and  unforeseen  results  of  market  forces played  an  important  role.