## ORIGINAL PAPER

## Determinants in the adoption of a non-labor-substitution technology: mechanical ventilation in West Virginia coal mines, 1898-1907

<!-- image -->

Javier Silvestre 1 · John E. Murray 2

Received: 9 July 2022 / Accepted: 17 October 2022 / Published online: 9 November 2022

© The Author(s) 2022

## Abstract

Accounts of technological change during industrialization processes based on laborsaving innovations are commonplace, even more so in the coal mining industry, in which the focus has until now been placed on the steam engine water pump and the coal cutting machine. However, to better understand technological change, we need to  bear  in  mind  the  study  of  complementary  capital.  While  previous  research  on complementary capital relies on evidence for manufacturing or the aggregate economy, this paper focuses on a case study, which provides more details on technology adoption decisions. This paper considers mechanical ventilation, a prominent and largely overlooked technology complementary to labor, as a response to stale air and explosions in the exploitation of coal. We examine the determinants in the adoption of the newer technology-the mechanical ventilator-through an economic model that is established at a high level of disaggregation: the mine. We concentrate on the West Virginia coalfield at the turn of the twentieth century, an apt historical setting for the study of technology adoption. We quantify characteristics of mines over time, so we are able to estimate a panel. We show the importance of various costs and benefits in explaining which type of mine converted from older technologies to the newer technology. The model is complemented with qualitative information, which helps to explain why an older technology slowed the process of adopting the newer as a result of different costs associated with the substitution.

Keywords Technology adoption determinants · Non-labor-substitution technology · Coal mining · Mechanical ventilation · USA

John Murray died on March 27, 2018. Earlier drafts of this article were completed by the two authors previous to John's Death. I (Javier Silvestre) have written the revised version.

*

Javier Silvestre

javisil@unizar.es

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## JEL Classification O31 · O33 · N51 · L71 · Q30

## 1  Introduction

One of the most important current debates deals with the replacement of labor with capital.  Comparisons  with  previous  periods  of  intense  technological  change  are prevalent. Accounts of the US and British industrial revolutions based on labor-saving biased technological change by Habakkuk (1962) and Allen (2009), respectively, are well known. It has also been argued that during the nineteenth-century industrial revolution the 'displacement effect' tended to predominate over the 'reinstatement effect.' That is to say, capital and new technologies substituted part of the labor and, therefore, labor demand tended to fall (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2019; Frey 2019). These interpretations,  however,  are  not  immune  to  criticism,  as  shown  by  several studies recently reviewed by Otojanov et al. (2020). One of the objections refers to exactly which individual industries or techniques the labor-saving framework may or may not be applied to, as saving capital and time as well as improving quality were targets of several new technologies (MacLeod 1988; Mokyr 2009, 2010; Kelly et al. 2014). Complementarities between capital and labor, in fact, have been a feature of the nineteenth and twentieth US industrialization processes (Goldin and Katz 1998; Katz and Margo 2014; Lafortune et al. 2019). 1

From this point on, the contributions of this study to the literature on technology adoption during the industrial revolution are twofold. First, it considers a nonlabor-substitution technology: the mechanical ventilation of coal mines as a major response to stale air and explosions. To better understand technological change, the evidence for labor-saving innovations needs to be supplemented with that of complementary capital. Previous research on complementary capital (as cited above) has tended to favor the analysis of manufacturing or the aggregate economy, whereas this paper aims to garner more detail on technology adoption decisions, focusing on a case study on coal mining.

To  start  with,  we  consider  coal  mining  to  be  an  industry  which  is  typically thought of as crucially important for industrialization and economic growth in several European countries and the USA throughout the nineteenth century.  Tradition2 ally, accounts of technological change in coal mining have put the emphasis on the horse, labor and fuel-saving steam engine water pump, and the labor-saving coal cutting machine (Greasley 1982; Dustmann 1986; MacLeod 1988; Fishback 1992; Boal 1994, 2017; Scott 2006; Allen 2009; Nuvolari and Verspagen 2009; Uchimura 2010; Nuvolari et al. 2011). As a result, the adoption of mechanical ventilation, a safetyrelated technology that was complementary to labor, has been largely overlooked. However, as pointed out by the British mining engineer and colliery manager Robert

L. Galloway (1882), once water drainage was resolved with pumping steam engines, explosions became one of the main concerns in the exploitation of coal. Ventilation was 'the far more important and safer system' to reduce explosions in mines, stated a report by a reputable committee appointed to investigate the causes of accidents (The South Shields Committee 1843, p. 74).

Our second contribution is an economic model of the determinants in the adoption of technology, which uses a high level of disaggregation: the mine. The efficient rate of diffusion of a new technology is the subject of considerable debate. A priori it is not often clear how quickly entrepreneurs should adopt a new technology, and in fact, it has been found that a number of technologies, which ultimately became widespread, were slow to diffuse.  In contrast, our data show that the adoption of 3 mechanical  ventilation  was  relatively  fast,  even  though  a  substantial  number  of mines stuck with the most common older technology. We are able to quantify characteristics of mines, and as a result consider which type of mines, driven by costs and benefits, converted from older technologies to the newer technology within a given time period. While decisions to convert to mechanical ventilation may have been made at the firm level, the actual installation took place at the pithead.

We trace the same mines over time. Variation in mine attributes makes identification,  under  certain  assumptions, possible. To make the most of the panel-data nature of our source, and given that one of the key explanatory variables (firedamp) is  time-invariant,  we  run  correlated  random  effects  (CRE)  models.  First  proposed by Mundlak (1978), CRE models produce fixed effects by adding means of timevariant variables as regressors in random effects estimates (Wooldridge 2002, 2020; Allison  2009;  Green  2012;  Green  and  Zhang  2019).  To  confirm  our  findings,  we perform a series of robustness checks in relation to sample size, model specification, location of mines, number of technological options, and potential endogeneity. We also explore the short-term effects of adopting mechanical ventilation.

Our empirical strategy is mainly based on information provided by inspectors in the State of West Virginia Department of Mines annual reports (hereafter WVDM). The same source has been exploited by Boal (2017, 2018) in his analyses of productivity and accidents. 4

We also used a circular by the US Bureau of Mines (Forbes and Owings 1934) as a guide in the case of one of the explanatory variables (explosions). Additional, detailed,  comments  by  mine  inspectors,  as  well  as  descriptions  of  the  suitability of ventilation technologies by contemporary engineers, help to enhance the understanding of the determinants of technology adoption. In this regard, we also utilized information provided by mine owners and miners appointed by the State governor (Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia 1909). Overall, this is a

different approach within the cliometric literature on innovations, a field in which a large number of studies have used patent statistics (as reviewed by Khan 2013; Streb 2016; and Moser 2018). 5

We focus on the West Virginia coal basin at the turn of the twentieth century, an appropriate historical setting for the comprehension of technology adoption, especially one related to safety. During that period, the coal basin started to undergo an intense process of growth and change, becoming the second state in terms of coal production-after Pennsylvania (US Geological Survey 1908; Dix 1977; Fishback 1992; Boal 1995; Rakes 1999). Its production ended up surpassing that of Belgium (in 1901) and France (in 1905) (Ministère de l'Intérieur 1904-1913; Ministère des Travaux Publics 1904-1913; Wright 1905). Furthermore, before the end of the first decade  of  the  twentieth  century  explosions  in  West  Virginia  were  comparatively high and on the rise. In a context of exceptionally vague and inadequate safety legislation, it is of interest to know how mine owners responded.

Our findings show that mine owners responded to a series of factors reflecting costs and benefits by adopting mechanical ventilation, which in fact was the most common recommendation made by inspectors. However, the acceptance of newer technology was not a clear-cut process. As a result, owners of several mines were put  off  of  installing  mechanical  ventilation  due  to  the  costs  associated  with  the change of method. In short, as is so often the case in the history of technology, the predominantly established method continued even after the newer one had become common (Engerman and Rosenberg 2016; Streb 2016).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses different ventilation technologies. Section 3 describes the West Virginia coal basin according to our objectives. Section 4 presents the data and the empirical strategy. Section 5 provides analyses of the determinants in the adoption of mechanical ventilation, adds several robustness checks, and discusses the results. Section 6 sets out our conclusions.

## 2    A brief history of ventilation

Better ventilation improved breathing conditions for underground miners.  The ven6 tilation of mines was also the response to explosions caused, particularly, by methane gas or 'firedamp'-a colorless and odorless gas that forms naturally alongside coal-and, sometimes, its interaction  with  coal  dust-another  inflammable  agent. Explosions, and fires, were related to two main procedures pertaining to the extraction of coal: the lighting of mines and the use of explosives to release the coal from rock  strata  (e.g.,  Murray  and  Silvestre  2021).   Contaminated  air  would  explode 7 in  the  presence  of  a  naked  flame,  from  a  candle  or  a  safety  lamp  with  the  gauze removed. Lamps were also used to detect firedamp, as flames became blue and elongated in its presence, however they were, to some extent, inaccurate. Several kinds of  explosives  and  ways  of  transmitting  the  charge  to  the  explosive  material  were also  prone  to  igniting  ambient  explosive  materials.  Safety  lamps  and  explosives

technologies improved over the course of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Silvestre 2022). However, the relatively narrow scope of these improvements gave rise to the need for ventilation systems to clear the air.

By the beginning of the nineteenth century, two methods were commonly used to  ventilate  coal  mines:  natural  ventilation  and  furnaces  (e.g.,  UK  Parliamentary Papers 1853).  Natural ventilation was based on the variation in temperature from 8 outside to inside the mine enabling a steady flow of air.  Natural ventilation, how9 ever, worked in only the simplest of mines. As mines became bigger and/or deeper, and  more  intricate,  natural  ventilation  became  more  variable  and  uncertain  and, therefore, less reliable.

The artificial alternative to natural ventilation relied on heat. The baseline method placed a furnace near the bottom of a ventilation shaft (see Fig. 3a). The heat generated by the furnace reduced the air pressure immediately above it and drew stale air and firedamp from the connected galleries. Then, the warm air rose upward and on into the atmosphere (e.g., Hinsley 1969). Many safer and more productive variations and improvements were developed over time (Galloway 1882; Lupton 1893). 10 Furnaces were sometimes substituted by boilers and steam jets. However, this alternative to furnaces tended to be expensive and inefficient (Atkinson 1892; Wabner 1902).

The  ultimate  successor  of  furnaces  and  steam  jets  was  the  mechanical  ventilator. Ventilation machines powered by steam engines worked on a variety of different principles. 11 Eventually, the centrifugal fan-as depicted in Fig. 3b-emerged as the most effective of these technologies (e.g., Cory 2005). 12 The earliest of these machines appeared in Belgium (1840) and Britain (1851), and then in Prussia (1856) (Preussische Schlagwetter Commission 1887; Murray and Silvestre 2015). US engineers may have started to pay attention to innovations in Europe in the mid-1850s (Wallace 1987). The  USA  being  at  first  a  follower  country,  this  was  common  to  other  technologies (Khan 2013). The first mechanical ventilator in the Pennsylvania anthracite fields was installed in 1858 (Wallace 1987). The precise date for West Virginia, which developed later, is not known, but the first mine inspectors' annual report, in 1883, referred to only one instance of mechanical ventilation in operation (WVDM 1883).

## 3    The West Virginia coal basin at the turn of the century: growth, safety and ventilation

The first record of coal in the Appalachian fields was in West Virginia, together with Maryland, in 1736, and within a century coal had been discovered in many parts of the state (Eavenson 1942). The production of coal and the number of workers in the basin grew over time-as shown in Fig. 4. Little machinery was required in early

mines, but the mechanization of coal cutting and haulage advanced from the turn of the century onward (e.g., Dix 1977; Boal 1995).

Explosions  in  West  Virginia  before  the  early  1910s  were  overrepresented  as  a cause of death. A comprehensive data collection by Fay (1915) shows that, between 1885 and 1913, explosions in the USA as a whole were responsible for 13.9 percent of total fatalities at coal mines, causing 4.6 fatalities per 10,000 workers per year. By contrast, in West Virginia, explosions were responsible for 21.8 percent of total fatalities, causing 10.9 fatalities per 10,000 workers. The deterioration of safety accelerated  between  the  late  1890s  and  1907,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 13 The  absolute number of explosions and fatalities reached highs of 21 and 501 in 1907. 14 1907 was the year of the Monongah 6 &amp; 8 mine disaster, the deadliest in US coal mining history, which (officially) killed 362 miners (McAteer 2014; Brnich and Kowalski-Trakofker 2010). The difference between West Virginia fatality due to explosion rates and the national average subsequently fell (Boal 2018).

Rather than distinct geological conditions, the deficient regulation of safety (in general) and ventilation (in particular) seems to be the biggest determining factor in explaining the poor performance of the West Virginia coal basin. 15 Scholars have argued that the stiff competition within the industry, in which (despite the presence of a few large companies) small-scale mines predominated, forced an emphasis on production and avoidance of extra, safety-associated, costs on the part of both mine owners and managers (Graebner 1976; Dix 1977; Eller 1982; Fagge 1996; Uchimura 2010). 16

West  Virginia's  first  mining  law  was  enacted  in  1883.  However,  safety  measures before 1908 were few and, in general, loosely enforced, probably making West Virginia  the  worst  US  state  in  these  terms  (Graebner  1976;  Fishback  1985;  Boal 2018). The number of inspectors was insufficient, in comparison with other states, and required inspections were not always carried out (Graebner 1976). Moreover, inspectors  had  no  power  to  make  arrests.  It  was  not  until  1907  that  an  inspector was legally able to close a mine, most often for poor ventilation (Fishback 1992). However, even then companies would fight in the courts to reopen mines (Graebner 1976).

On a related note, before the workers' compensation law was enacted in 1913, companies were liable for accidents at the mine, which of course included explosions (Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia 1909; McAteer 2014). However, in mining states employers' negligence was difficult to prove and attributing  responsibility  to  miners  was  condoned  by  the  legal  system  (Fishback 1987, 1992). Examples appear in the WVDM annual reports (e.g., 1905, 1907; see

Fig. 1 Explosions and fatalities due to explosions in West Virginia, 1883-1933, A. Per 10,000 worker year,  B.  Per  1,000,000  short  tons  mined  per  year, Notes :  Firedamp and coal dust explosions. The two vertical lines delimit the period (1898-1907) for which the empirical model is estimated. Sources : Forbes and  Owings  (1934),  for  explosions  and  fatalities;  West  Virginia  Office  of  Miners'  Health  Safety  and Training, https://  mines  afety.  wv.  gov/  histo  rical-  stati  stical-  data/  produ  ction-  of-  coal-  and-  coke-  1863-  2013/, for employment and coal production

<!-- image -->

also  Corbin  1981;  Eller  1982).  West  Virginia  inspectors  asked  for  a  clearer  damages framework-similar to those established in Pennsylvania and Ohio (WVDM 1898). Voluntary payment on the part of West Virginia mine owners was perhaps

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Relative use of ventilation methods (%) in West Virginia, 1883-1909, Notes: Data  before  1897 are available for 1883, 1889, 1891, 1893 and 1895. Sources :  WVDM (1883, 1889, 1891, 1893, 1895, 1897-1909)

<!-- image -->

uncommon (McAteer 2014). While insurance companies tended to be reluctant to assume the risk of insuring miners' lives (WVDM 1897, 1906).

As a result, miners and mine owners contributed to relief funds of different sorts (Fishback 1992; Fishback and Kantor 2000). Local union funds, company funds and hospital benefits funds were found in West Virginia by a US Commissioner of Labor (1909, pp. 201, 391, 623) report-as introduced by Fishback (1987). As an example, the agreement at the Macdonald Colliery included miners' dues, the company's contribution, disability (temporary) payments and death benefits (WVDM 1897). 17

With specific regard to ventilation, firstly, West Virginia laws did not stipulate a particular threshold concentration of firedamp to mark the boundary between manageable and dangerous levels. 18 Rather, by 1898 (after some amendments), the state required each mine to supply at least one hundred cubic feet of fresh air per minute per miner (WVDM 1898). Concerns about the lack of stricter regulation were raised by the US Bureau of Mines and the US Coal Commission, as it was believed that many mines may have been incorrectly classified as non-gassy (Rice and Jones 1915; US Coal Commission 1925; Forbes and Owings 1934).

Secondly, the first law of 1883 and the revisions of 1898 and 1901 did not specify what to do in the case of firedamp being present, thereby leaving open the possibility

of using a fan or other methods (WVDM 1901). This flexibility may have been in line with the owners' economic interests, but inspectors tended to hold a different stance-as also noted by the US Bureau of Mines (Forbes and Owings 1934). More often than not, the inspectors either expected and recommended or, in the case it were already in place, praised the use of mechanical ventilation. Two typical examples of this:

'[In the Ronda mine (Coalburg Colliery Co.)] The ventilation is produced by a furnace, but owing to the large development of the mine the furnace is too small to give sufficient ventilation (…) The assurance was given that a fan would be placed in the near future' (WVDM 1902, p. 201).

'Since the printing of the last report, this company [Shawnee Coal &amp; Coke Co.] has replaced its old furnace by a fan, with a vast improvement to the ventilation' (WVDM 1895, p. 22). 19

As a matter of fact, data available reported in Fig. 2 reveal that, despite the lack of legal requirements, mechanical ventilation was adopted rapidly. The share of mines with fans rose from one percent in 1883 to about one-fourth by the early 1890s and to 76 percent in 1909. Although West Virginia got off to a late start in coal production, the rate at which it adopted mechanical ventilation was not so different from that of the (also bituminous) coalfield in Pennsylvania, as shown in Fig. 5. However, turning to Fig. 2, at the end of the 1910s the furnace was still the preferred ventilation method in about 20 percent of the mines.

Legislation related to explosions was also inadequate. To begin with, coal dust was sometimes a key contributor to explosions (Aldrich 1995; Murray and Silvestre 2021). Thus, in the presence of coal dust, firedamp was inflammable or explosive at  very  low  levels.  In  addition,  coal  dust  on  its  own  could  potentially  be  ignited, for example by blasting. Explosions involving coal dust also tended to be of greater magnitude, as dust could propagate the initial explosion through the entire mine. It seems this applied to West Virginia (Rice 1910). A state law was passed in 1901 stipulating that coal dust must be sprinkled or rock dusted (Fishback 1992). However,  is  has  been  argued  that  the  treatment  of  coal  dust  was  limited  to  mines  that generated gas 'in dangerous quantities' (Corbin 1981). What is more, the practice of  connecting  mines  for  convenience  of  construction  and  transportation,  but  also thereby facilitating the spread of the explosion, had already been prohibited in some states, but not in West Virginia (McAteer 2014).

Certificates of competency for mine managers or certain types of miners were not required,  unlike  in  some  other  US  states  (Dix  1977;  Fishback  1992;  Aldrich  1997). Untrained,  sometimes  foreign  (non-English  speaking),  miners  acted  as  shot  firers (Rakes 1999; McAteer 2014). The use of 'safety explosives' was first recorded in 1908 (Forbes and Owings 1934). 20 'Shooting off the solid' or blasting without previously undercutting the coal was a procedure employed as it raised miners' productivity. The problem was that this practice used large amounts of powder and, therefore, increased

<!-- image -->

the risk of explosion (Aldrich 1997). Shooting off the solid was already prohibited in many countries and neighboring states, but permitted and apparently common in West Virginia. In 1906, an inspector declared that 'a great many [miners] persist in doing such acts' (WVDM 1906, p. 400). Similarly, a report reviewing safety conditions concluded that 'the practice of shooting off the solid […] is still practiced to a large extent throughout the State' (Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia 1909, p. 605). 21 However, the same report also recognized numerous companies in which this practice was not permitted and pursued. In fact, in its first reporting of shooting off the solid in 1911, the US Geological Survey (1912) reported that one percent of coal was extracted this way.

## 4    Data and empirical strategy

Our aim is  to  estimate  the  determinants  in  the  adoption  of  the  latest  safety  technology. We propose that the adoption of technology was a choice by coal owners, driven by associated costs and benefits. We start by means of quantifying the characteristics of mines, thereby determining which type of mines were more prone to adopt mechanical ventilation. We then (in the Discussion section) delve deeper into the mine owners' possible motivations for substituting, or not, older technologies.

The period considered in our model is 1898-1907. Beginning in 1897 the state of West Virginia-in the WVDM annual reports-surveyed all mines that declared the employment of at least ten miners. However, data on explosions reported in the 1897 WVDM annual report do not match with those reported in the revision by the US Bureau of Mines (Forbes and Owings 1934), whose information we used as support. Therefore, we decided to skip the first year. 22 As of 1907, increasing numbers of  mergers,  acquisitions  and  mines  being  renamed  meant  that  the  share  of  mines providing necessary information, such as the ventilation method, that we were unable to match, grew substantially. The 1898-1907 years, nevertheless, correspond to a period in which fan adoption was taken up at considerable pace, against a background of economic expansion and lack of legal obligation (as seen above).

To estimate a panel, in principle, observations of the mine for at least two years from within the period are required. 23 Mines with only one observation-year have consequently not been used. 24 For  all  mine-year observations, the dependent variable was set equal to zero if the mine was still ventilated by natural, furnace or other

(usually steam) methods, and to one if the mine had converted to mechanical ventilation. 25 Nine mines have been dropped because they changed from mechanical to furnace ventilation. 26 There does not appear to be a clear profile of these mines, at least in terms of their quantifiable characteristics. 27 With two exceptions: they were non-gassy mines with practically no record of explosions (In the period considered, there  was  only  one,  apparently  minor,  explosion  in  one  mine).  Qualitative  information provided by inspectors is not very helpful in this particular matter, as they did not seem to comment on the reasons for the substitution. One of these mines changed hands in the previous year (WVDM 1904, p. 165), whereas in another, the owner  may  have  been  experimenting  with  different  ventilation  methods  (WVDM 1901, p. 203). We will return to this issue in Sect. 5.3.

Comments  by  inspectors  throughout  the  annual  reports  suggest  that  fans  and older technologies were mutually exclusive. In our sample, only eight mines with observations for at least two years reported having both a fan and a furnace. As in these instances a furnace was probably kept as a back-up, perhaps temporarily, we decided to set the dependent variable to one. Inevitably, the panel is unbalanced. As explained by Boal (2018), some relevant data affecting the variables were at times missed, and mines were sometimes unable to be matched across successive annual reports because the mine did not operate in all years or changed its name. The principal panel is comprised of 680 mines and 2,216 observations. 28

Our  main  empirical  analysis  consists  of  the  estimation  of  a  logistic  model,  as a result of the dependent variable, fan adoption, being dichotomous. As a starting point, we relied on pooled specifications and random effects panel methods. Random effects models assume that unobserved effects are not correlated with explanatory variables. This may be a bold assumption. Mine specific characteristics such as geological conditions and management practices (which are not reported in the annual  reports)  are  likely  to  be  correlated  with  other  explanatory  variables-for example, productivity (Boal 2018). However, the gassy/non-gassy status of mines, a key explanatory variable, did not change over time (In technical terms, the withinvariation of our firedamp variable is zero). Therefore, we also run correlated random effects (CRE) models. As explained above (in the Introduction), this approach estimates within effects in random effect models. In practical terms, this allows for the inclusion of time-invariant variables in what is effectively a fixed effects approach (Wooldridge 2020, p. 476). The rest  of  the  explanatory  variables  vary  over  time.

Robust standard errors were clustered by mine in all specifications (Cameron and Trivedi 2010).

Table 1 describes the dependent and explanatory variables at mine level. 29 In our sample, 64 percent of the mine-year observations are for mines ventilated by fan. Explanatory variables reflect characteristics of mines associated with cost and benefit factors. To mitigate problems with endogeneity, each explanatory variable was assigned its  value  as  of  the  previous  year,  which  implies  that  observations  of  the mine for at least three years are needed.

An initial  benefit  to  be  derived  from  the  adoption  of  mechanical  ventilation  is connected to the presence of firedamp. The percentage of gassy mines that suffered explosions in a year was: 21.05 (1898), 10.00 (1899), 8.70 (1900), 7.14 (1901), 7.14 (1902), 5.56 (1903), 15.79 (1904), 11.11 (1905), 10.81 (1906), and 14.71 (1907). As compared to the much lower percentages for non-gassy mines: 0.51 (1898), 1.01 (1899), 2.27 (1900), 1.58 (1901), 1.03 (1902), 2.51 (1903), 1.14 (1904), 1.27 (1905), 0.59 (1906), and 2.29 (1907). The expected effect of firedamp is therefore positive. 9.2 percent of the mine-year observations in our main sample are for mines considered to be gassy (Table 1). This proportion is not far from the 6.5 percent indicated by inspectors for 1897 (WVDM 1897). The number of gassy mines in West Virginia may, in fact, have increased during the very last years of the century-as also noted by one inspector (see Aldrich 1997).

A second benefit concerns explosions. Previous explosions at the mine provided information to mine owners about the probability of future explosions and the potential  advantages  of  adopting  mechanical  ventilation.  Thus,  witnesses  of  explosions were examined 'with a view if possible of determining the means by which these disastrous explosions may be prevented' (Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia 1909, p. 816; see also Rakes 2008). 30 In this vein, after an explosion at the Berryburg mine (Southern Coal &amp; Transportation Company), an expedition visited the mineworks to enquire about the causes (WVDM 1901, p. 88). 31 The expected effect of the number of explosions on the adoption of a more powerful, mechanical, ventilation system is then clearly positive. 32 We consider all explosions, comprising both explosions causing death and/or injury, as well as those with no casualties.

However, the extent of the impact of this variable is difficult to predict, as quantitative information on the cost of an explosion is scant. Explosions may have engendered  high  costs  derived  from  the  interruption  of  mining  activity,  and  even  the destruction  of  the  mine,  as  stated  by  owners,  miners  and  inspectors  from  several

basins (Aldrich 1995, 1997). 33 In his final report, the Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia (1909, p. 820) points out that, after an explosion, '(…) the loss of thousands of dollars of property surely and unexpectedly follow.' Similarly, a group of West Virginia mine owners declared that:

' (…) putting aside all question of legal damages with the annoyance and expense of lawsuits, and coming down to cold blooded business facts, the mere delay and interruption of work in a colliery, caused by a single accident, is likely to cost more than the work that would have prevented it, while any serious disaster may cost thousands of dollars in labor and other thousands in the loss and interruption of business.' (Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia 1909, p. 788).

The cost of one large explosion at Tucker County 'to start [the mine] to work' (and before taking into account any possible lawsuits) was estimated at $3,888 (Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia 1909, p. 162). However, the total  cost  would have varied greatly from one explosion to another, depending on factors such as the magnitude of the blast and the awarding and extent of compensations. 34 Furthermore, explosions were statistically infrequent (see Fig. 1). 35 Most mines did not experience an explosion in a given year and the threat may have been a  remote  one  (Aldrich  1995,  p.  492).  In  our  principal  sample  of  2,216  mine-year observations, explosions are only present in 48 of them.

The  next  potential  benefit  of  adopting  mechanical  ventilation  is  related  to  the scale of the operation of the mine, which can be measured in terms of the size of the workforce. 36 Reports provide information on underground workers. There are two main reasons why large mines, which employed more miners, may have benefited from adopting mechanical ventilation. First, they required more fresh and fast-flowing air. As plainly written by an inspector,

'Sixty men are employed inside this [Roanoke] mine and six mules are used for hauling the coal. The ventilation of the mine is produced by a furnace which does not  give  a  sufficient  volume  of  air  for  the  men  working  underground'  (WVDM 1897, p. 198). 37

Second, more miners meant a higher risk of explosions. 'The most incompetent and unskilled miner establishes the safety within a mine,' declared a West Virginia inspector in 1907 (Aldrich 1997, p. 60). Perhaps it was more than that. Coal mining

Table 1 Descriptive statistics. Sources : WVDM (1898-1907)

|                                     | Mean   | Std. Dev   | Min   | Max    |
|-------------------------------------|--------|------------|-------|--------|
| Dependent variables                 |        |            |       |        |
| Mechanical ventilation (yes/no)     | 0.643  | 0.479      | 0     | 1      |
| Explanatory variables               |        |            |       |        |
| Firedamp (yes/no)                   | 0.092  | 0.289      | 0     | 1      |
| Number of explosions                | 0.025  | 0.179      | 0     | 3      |
| Number of (underground) workers/100 | 0.826  | 0.652      | 0.02  | 6.69   |
| Share of output mined by machine    | 22.775 | 36.693     | 0     | 100    |
| Productivity/100                    | 7.728  | 4.294      | 0.052 | 65.118 |
| Seam thickness (inches)             | 66.794 | 20.860     | 26    | 168    |

Period = 1898-1907. Firedamp is constant over time. Productivity = tons of coal produced / number of underground workers. Number of observations = 2,216 and number of mines = 680

was  a  complex  endeavor  involving  a  great  deal  of  risk,  which  'depended  on  the behavior of everybody else' (Aldrich 1997, p. 54; see also Fishback 1992). 38

One final benefit of installing a fan is related to the mechanization of coal extraction,  measured  as  the  share  of  output  mined  by  machine.  Early  mechanization brought its own risks of explosion based on the contributing factors of production of coal dust and sparks (Rice and Hartmann 1939; Aldrich 1997; Rakes 1999; McAteer 2014). Moreover, mechanization in the West Virginia coalfield was fast. During the  period  considered  in  our  model  (1898-1907),  the  proportion  of  output  mined by machine increased from 7.9 to 36.7 percent (US Geological Survey 1900; 1903; 1908).

Potential costs of the adoption of new technology must also be accounted for in the  model.  A  priori,  there  is  fair  reason  to  expect  a  positive  relationship  between productivity  and  the  adoption  of  mechanical  ventilation.  More  productive  mines would have found it easier to finance the installation of a fan, the upfront costs of which would have been high-as argued in Sect. 5.3 (see also Rakes 1999). We considered productivity to be measured as tonnage per (underground) worker.

With regard to further geological conditions (i.e., the presence of firedamp) of the mine affecting benefits or costs of technology adoption, the lack of information on depth is perhaps a limitation because ventilation may have become even more important  as  depth  increased  (e.g.,  Aldrich  1995).  The  WVDM  reports,  unfortunately, did not comment on this. This could have been the result of most mines being accessed by a drift, instead of a shaft, so depth was harder to define. 39 Reports do provide information on seam thickness, representing a further cost. Seam thickness, in reality, may have been a determinant of productivity (Young and Anderson 1957). The correlation between seam thickness and productivity in our main sample is 0.38

Dependent variable: adoption of mechanical ventilation in year t +1 =  1 (0 otherwise)

Table 2 Adoption of mechanical ventilation in mines, 1898-1907. Logistic model

|                             | 1 Pooled dy/dx   | 2 Pooled dy/dx   | 3 RE dy/dx   | 4 RE dy/dx   | 5 Correlated RE dy/dx   | 6 Correlated RE dy/dx   |
|-----------------------------|------------------|------------------|--------------|--------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Benefits                    |                  |                  |              |              |                         |                         |
| Firedamp  t                 | 0.339***         | 0.100            | 0.353***     | 0.238*       | 0.281***                | 0.149                   |
|                             | (0.064)          | (0.124)          | (0.046)      | (0.105)      | (0.043)                 | (0.122)                 |
| Number of explosions  t     | 0.264*           | 0.258*           | 0.221**      | 0.219**      | 0.139*                  | 0.139 †                 |
|                             | (0.108)          | (0.109)          | (0.071)      | (0.071)      | (0.066)                 | (0.079)                 |
| Number of workers/100  t    | 0.337***         | 0.333***         | 0.271***     | 0.267***     | 0.136**                 | 0.133**                 |
| Number of workers/100       | (0.033)          | (0.034)          | (0.036)      | (0.036)      | (0.043)                 | (0.047)                 |
| x Firedamp  t               |                  | 0.488 †          |              | 0.219        |                         | 0.049                   |
|                             |                  | (0.250)          |              | (0.198)      |                         | (0.129)                 |
| Share of output             |                  |                  |              |              |                         |                         |
| mined by machine  t         | 0.003***         | 0.003***         | 0.002***     | 0.002***     | 0.001**                 | 0.001**                 |
|                             | (0.000)          | (0.000)          | (0.000)      | (0.000)      | (0.000)                 | (0.000)                 |
| Costs                       |                  |                  |              |              |                         |                         |
| Productivity/100  t         | 0.017***         | 0.017***         | 0.011***     | 0.010***     | 0.005*                  | 0.005*                  |
|                             | (0.003)          | (0.003)          | (0.003)      | (0.003)      | (0.002)                 | (0.002)                 |
| Seam thickness  t           | 0.0004           | 0.0004           | 0.0003       | 0.0003       | -0.002                  | -0.001                  |
|                             | (0.001)          | (0.001)          | (0.001)      | (0.001)      | (0.001)                 | (0.001)                 |
| Year fixed effects          | Yes              | Yes              | Yes          | Yes          | Yes                     | Yes                     |
| No. of observations = 2,216 |                  |                  |              |              |                         |                         |
| No. of mines = 680          |                  |                  |              |              |                         |                         |
| F-test                      | 13.23***         | 12.23***         | 4.63***      | 4.10***      | 3.48***                 | 2.87***                 |
| Log pseudolikelihood        | -1,013.05        | -1,011.29        | -689.59      | -689.09      | -664.35                 | -664.08                 |

RE = random effects. Average marginal effects. Firedamp is constant over time. Cluster-robust standard errors at the mine level (in parentheses). All the regressions include an intercept term. † = significant at the 0.10 level; *   at the 0.05 level; ** at the 0.01 level; *** at the 0.001 level

(This is the highest correlation between our explanatory variables). We will consider the effect of this association in Sect. 5.1. Seam thickness may vary over time, presumably due to the change of seam within each mine (as shown by the data). The minimum and maximum values (Table 1) almost exactly correspond to the values for the coalfield, according to Cohen (1984).

Finally, time, annual, effects will be included in all the specifications as a proxy for decreasing costs of mechanical ventilation.

One potential limitation of our model is that we do not consider unionism to be a factor in the adoption of mechanical ventilation. Boal (2009, 2018), based on an

<!-- image -->

estimate of unionization from a collection of sources, shows that unionized mines tended to reduce fatality rates, especially for the 1897-1913 period. However, given the early difficulties faced by workers to organize themselves, the level of unionism for our period of study (1898-1907) tended to be low: zero percent before 1901, 6.5 in 1902, and around 13 percent afterward (Boal 1992, Fig. 1; 2006, Table 3; see also Fishback 1984, p. 758). Miners, in fact, may have preferred more powerful ventilation technology, in light of their complaints about furnaces as noted by inspectors (WVDM 1897, p. 50).

For the purposes of bolstering the results, our empirical analysis will include a series of robustness checks (in Sect. 5.2).

## 5    Results

## 5.1    Main results

The results of a model of new technology adoption are shown in Table 2. Average marginal effects are reported. All the estimated coefficients of variables tend to be significant at the usual levels, with seam thickness being the main exception. Signs are also consistent with each other across different estimates. In CRE estimates (columns 5 and 6), time-averages of explanatory variables (i.e., produced fixed effects) are not interpretable and therefore not reported. The results in columns 5 and 6 are plausible. In relation to columns 1-4, the magnitude of the estimated coefficients of all the variables is smaller-once the produced fixed effects have been added. 40

With regard to variables reflecting benefits, in column 5, the identification of a mine as gassy increases the probability of adopting a fan by 28 percent. It is more than likely not by chance that mine owners reacted decisively to this factor. Inspectors  made  their  point,  clearly  and  repeatedly,  that  mechanical  ventilation  was  the best way to cope with an unequivocal danger such as firedamp. For example, one stated that:

'In mines where there is fire damp the fan has a decided advantage over the furnace (…) The current produced by a fan is more regular than can be produced by a furnace' (WVDM 1889, p. 5).

Another inspector, in relation to the law leaving the means of ventilation completely open, explained that:

'(…) it is a well known fact that furnaces in mines generating explosive gas have been considered a source of danger (…) It is also a well known fact that furnaces are very unreliable sources of ventilating' (WVDM 1905, p. 241).

In columns 5-6, each explosion in the previous year increases the probability of adopting a fan by 14 percent. In further, unreported specifications, a binary variable, as an alternative to the number of explosions, was not significant. An additional lag

of the explosions variable did not show an effect either. The difference between the extent of the 'potential' effect of firedamp and the 'real' effect of explosions may be  striking  at  first.  However,  as  argued  above,  explosions  were  ultimately  quite  a rare  event,  and  perhaps  no  more  expensive  than  installing  mechanical  ventilation. Moreover, mine owners blamed miners' carelessness, in relation to various tasks, as a factor in the discussion on explosions, thus shifting the focus away from investment in costly safety devices (Graebner 1976; see also Corbin 1981).

The  scale  of  operation,  proxied  by  the  number  of  workers,  as  expected,  also influences the adoption of fans. Bigger mines required a more powerful ventilation technology. In columns 5-6, an addition of 100 miners (which is a figure close to the mean of 83, as reported in Table 1) leads to an increase in the probability of adopting a fan of about 13 percent. In columns 2, 4 and 6, interactions suggest that the effect of the size of the mine does not really depend on whether firedamp was present or not. Further, unreported, specifications, using the mine's coal tonnage as an alternative measure of the scale of operation provided similar results to those in Table 2-except for the productivity variable, perhaps due to its high correlation, 0.55,  with  mine's  coal  tonnage.  The  share  of  output  mined  by  machine  also  have positive and significant effects on the adoption of mechanical ventilation. This result shows the importance of risks brought by early and rapid mechanization.

As for cost variables, productivity also has positive and significant effects on the adoption of mechanical ventilation. This result would appear to confirm the relationship between productivity and the ability to fund new technology. Seam thickness does  not  show  an  effect.  In  additional,  unreported,  regressions  we  removed  seam thickness to find basically the same results for the productivity variable, as well as for the rest of the variables.

Finally,  unreported time annual effects tend to show an increasing trend in the size  of  their  positive  influence-which  becomes  significant  from  1903  onward. 41 Thus, this result would suggest that mechanical ventilation may have become more affordable over time.

## 5.2    Robustness checks

## 5.2.1    Alternative samples

A justified concern with our results is related to the nature of the sample, a set of matched mines that appear for at least two years within the period. Therefore, we first considered a series of samples to try to minimize the possibility of bias: (a) we replaced the main sample with a new, restricted, sample of mines reporting for all the  years  between  1898  and  1907,  meaning  they  were  continuously  operating  for the entire period; (b) we used a sample in which the 'already treated' cases, that is  to  say,  those  mines  that  were  mechanically  ventilated  for  all  the  years  covered,

<!-- image -->

were removed. We did so to dismiss any possibility that the already treated cases may have been improving the precision of estimates; (c) we added the mines that only  reported  once,  to  obtain  a  larger  pool-The  results  of  this  robustness  check appear in Table 3; (d) we focused on the mines that only reported once. In two additional samples: e) we added the (previously excluded) nine mines that changed from mechanical to furnace ventilation;  and  (f)  we  removed  one  observation-year,  corresponding to the Monongah 6 &amp; 8 mine explosion-an outlier in terms of its magnitude. Unreported results were similar to those shown in Table 2, with the main exception of the lack of significance of the number of explosions in the samples of mines reporting for all the years (a) or only once (d), presumably due to their small size (57 and 494 mines). 42

## 5.2.2    Complementary model specifications

Here, we first estimated a linear probability model (LPM), a reasonable complement to the estimation of logistic models for binary response due to its inherent complexities (Wooldridge 2002). Then, we estimated a time to adoption model. Specifically, the Cox (1972) model which makes no assumptions on the shape of the 'hazard' function-the  probability  of  a  mine  adopting  mechanical  ventilation-over  time. Results tended to be similar, with the main exception of the weaker significance of the number of explosions variable.

## 5.2.3    The location of mines

The probability of adopting a fan may also potentially be influenced by the place where the  mine  was  located  within  the  coal  basin,  due  to,  for  example,  the  relative  zeal  of  inspectors  in  their  push  for  mechanical  ventilation.  The  main  results were also robust when we accounted for this, by means of a multi-level model that includes variation at the level of (27) counties. 43

## 5.2.4    Three ventilation options

The  estimation  of  our  main  model  is  based  on  the  choice  between  two  options: mechanical ventilation versus all other available methods, which were basically furnace and natural. Natural ventilation, already of relatively little importance at the beginning of our period of study (24 percent of mines in 1898), was marginal at its end (10 percent in 1907) (see Fig. 2). Inspectors, in fact, only recommended natural ventilation in 'special cases,' usually referring to mines that were very small or

very short-lived (e.g., WVDM 1907). In any case, we estimated a multinomial logit model to lessen the assumption that the other methods (furnace and natural) can be put together in the same category. The CRE specification, in particular, performed worse than that in Table 2. However, in terms of signs and significance of variables, the general picture remains one of essentially no difference between natural and furnace, as compared to mechanical ventilation.

## 5.2.5    Potential endogeneity

Finally, our approach so far mitigates some problems of endogeneity because conversion of ventilation systems is observed only after the mine characteristics were identified. Still, it leaves open the question of how mines that were initially classified as having fan ventilation decided on that method in the first place. For many of the mines, there is no statistical method to answer this question, because we cannot know how old the mine was nor when it installed its fan. But there is a special case that addresses the question of the initial choice of fan ventilation: newly sunk mines. If we are willing to assume that the survey was complete (a bold assumption to be sure), then a mine that appears in a survey at time t but did not appear in time t-1 must have opened in the interim. We can ask: what characteristics, among these mines, were associated with the immediate installation  of  mechanical  ventilation? The results of specifications regarding this class of mines appear in Table 4 and are in line with the results in Table 2 (pooled columns 1 and 2). The weaker significance of the number of explosions (at the 0.141 level in column 1, Table 4) makes sense as this variable is not lagged.

## 5.3    Discussion

Our main specifications and robustness checks indicate that the mines that adopted mechanical  ventilation  tended  to  be  firedamp-laden,  have  already  suffered  explosions, be of a bigger size, be more mechanized, and display higher productivity. An additional estimation reported in Table 5 (column 1) would suggest that the installation of fans actually decreased explosions, thereby confirming the efficacy of inspectors' recommendations. The Poisson coefficient (in column 1) of having adopted a fan in the previous year implies that the expected number of explosions would be about 100((e -1.083 )-1)  ≈  66%  lower.  However,  as  shown  above  (Fig.  2),  the  older furnace method was still common in the coalfield at the end of our period covered. In this section, the cost-benefit explanation for the persistence of an earlier technology is supplemented with additional evidence. Furnaces were sometimes preferred to fans due to three costs associated with their substitution.

First, despite inspectors' guidance, for some owners the decision may have been taken  in  a  context  of  still  relatively  limited  information  on  the  advantages  of  the latest technology. Conversely, there was plenty of knowledge and experience regarding the older technology. How much volume of air per unit of time was an essential element to be considered (Galloway 1900; Shurick 1922). However, right up to the turn of the century fans tended to not always be more mechanically efficient than

furnaces. Experiment-based evidence in several countries (although difficult to compare) points to the late nineteenth century as precisely the moment in which furnaces reached their peak efficiency and mechanical ventilators increased theirs (Atkinson 1892; Lupton 1893; Clifford 1897; Wabner 1902). This came with the introduction of more advanced kinds of fans, such as the Guibal and Capell designs, whose popularity was rising in Europe and the USA (Murray and Silvestre 2015).

Second,  installation  costs  tended  to  be  much  lower  for  furnaces  than  for  fans. Across  several  sources,  we  have  been  unable  to  find  quantitative  evidence  of  the installation  cost  of  fans  at  the  West  Virginia  coalfield,  with  one  exception.  In Table 6, this estimate is put together with, still, more abundant estimates of ventilation methods from European sources. The term fan refers to those of Guibal and Capell types-the most frequently used in West Virginia. Estimates of installation costs  for  furnaces  are  mostly  from  Britain-where this (scarcer) type of information is more widely available (Wabner 1902). The West Virginia mine owner's estimate of $8,000 for a fan hovers in the mid-range. As a further reference, the average annual wage received per pick miner in West Virginia was $643.05 (WVDM 1907, p. xxxiii).

Therefore, initial costs may have been a heavy burden for the average West Virginia mine, which was of small size (Rakes 1999). 44 West Virginia mine inspectors recognized this as a major cost factor in the adoption decision. For example, in one mine, 'a fan was suggested as better [than a furnace] means of ventilation,' but the 'expenses of a fan was considered unwarrantable [by the mine owner]' (WVDM 1901, p. 153). The need to build a power source, as purchased electricity was not available in rural West Virginia, may have contributed as well. 45 To put it succinctly:

'(…) if the first cost of installing a fan could be done as cheaply as a great many of the makeshift furnaces, I am satisfied there would not be a mine in the country without a fan' (WVDM 1905, p. 241).

Finally, mine owners may have also faced a high degree of uncertainty in relation to the use of the new technology, hence the continued use of furnaces in some cases. Having no moving parts, furnaces tended to be reliable enough not to warrant being replaced by mechanical ventilators with all the usual bugs (Atkinson 1892). More importantly, for a full and efficient use of the fan a host of technical problems requiring a high degree of skill needed to be resolved (Shurick 1922). As stated in a US Bureau of Mines circular, 'In 1910, though a considerable amount of engineering knowledge was available, coal-mine ventilation was almost entirely on an empirical trial-and-error basis' (Fieldner 1950, p. 8). After all, the real test of a fan was if it worked in the opening to a particular working pit. Thus, the effectiveness of the fan depended not only on its strength and design but also on the aerodynamic drag

created by the unique characteristics of each mine (Rice and Jones 1915; Aldrich 1997). 46

The  improper  use  of  ventilation  in  the  West  Virginia  coalfield  may  have  been commonplace (Graebner 1976; Rakes 1999). For example, fans frequently stopped because of power cuts, and they were also operated only when the miners were in the mine, which was an erroneous practice (Forbes and Owings 1934). 47 Fans also needed to be located in the right place. However, this was not always the case (Watteyne et al. 1908; Forbes and Owings 1934). 48 Inspectors comment on explosions in which the cause appears to have been incorrectly used ventilation. 49 This situation throws light on why some mine owners were wary of the new technology, as noted by one American engineer (Clifford 1897). Summarized by an inspector thus:

'(…) many fans here are rendered almost useless from a standpoint of effectiveness, by being carelessly, and I must say, ignorantly erected' (WVDM 1901, p. 113). 50

## 6    Conclusions

A central issue in the economic history literature on technology adoption has been innovation induced by factor prices, often labor. This paper contributes to the literature considering a non-labor-substitution technology. Unlike most previous research on complementarity between capital and labor for the USA, which tends to adopt an aggregate approach, this paper has concentrated on a case study for the mining industry. This design not only allows more detail on technology adoption decisions, but also complements predominant accounts of technological change in coal mining, where the emphasis has been put on the water pump and the coal cutting machine.

This  paper  studies  a  prominent,  and  largely  overlooked,  technology  which emerged and developed as the nineteenth century progressed: the mechanical ventilation of mines to improve working conditions and reduce the effects of inflammable agents, so common in carbonaceous settings. Mechanical ventilation made it possible to overcome the relatively low effectiveness of safety lamps and explosives in addressing the limiting problem of explosions.

The West Virginia coal basin at the turn of the century offers a fortuitous setting for the investigation of a safety-related technology. The coalfield underwent an intense  process  of  growth  and  transformation,  and  also  had  a  notorious  record  of unsafe practices and explosions. Beyond recommendation by inspectors, no institutional influence on technology adoption behavior was present, as there were no legal requirements with regard to particular ventilation methods.

By means of an economic model, we have proposed an examination of the determinants in the adoption of newer technology. Our evidence consists of mine-level

<!-- image -->

observations, a high level of disaggregation that is still uncommon in the cliometric literature. Our analysis was carried out in two stages. We first quantified characteristics  of  mines  and,  within  a  panel-data  framework,  estimated  the  contribution  of costs and benefits of technological change. The results help to delineate the type of mine that converted from previous ventilation methods to mechanical ventilation. To confirm our findings, the empirical approach included robustness checks of various types.

The adoption of the new technology was fast, which is not a typical finding. An additional  analysis  suggests  that  mechanical  ventilation  paid  off  in  safety  terms, which is in line with the stance by the mine inspectors. However, it is worth noting that  fans  had  to  compete  with  the  established  form  of  older  technology,  i.e.,  furnaces. In a second stage, we delved deeper into the substitution process by means of contemporary engineering literature, as well as mine owners, miners and inspectors' comments, in order to grasp better the motivations of mine owners for installing, or not, the new technology. For some mines, the traditional technology seemed to be reasonable, ultimately due to the various costs associated with the conversion.

## Appendix

See Tables 3, 4, 5, 6 and Figs. 3, 4, 5.

Dependent variable: adoption of mechanical ventilation in year    =  1 (0 otherwise) t

Table 3 Adoption of mechanical ventilation in mines, 18981907, larger sample (Robustness check 5.2.1, 'c'). Logistic model

| Benefits                            | 1 Pooled dy/dx   | 2 Pooled dy/dx   |
|-------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Firedamp  t                         | 0.336***         | 0.247*           |
|                                     | (0.050)          | (0.104)          |
| Number of explosions  t             | 0.163**          | 0.160**          |
|                                     | (0.061)          | (0.061)          |
| Number of workers/100  t            | 0.346***         | 0.344***         |
|                                     | (0.026)          | (0.026)          |
| Number of workers/100 × Firedamp  t |                  | 0.162            |
|                                     |                  | (0.167           |
| Share of output mined by machine  t | 0.003***         | 0.003***         |
|                                     | (0.000)          | (0.000)          |
| Costs                               |                  |                  |
| Productivity/100  t                 | 0.018***         | 0.018***         |
|                                     | (0.003)          | (0.003)          |
| Seam thickness  t                   | -0.0002          | 0.0002           |
|                                     | (0.001)          | (0.001)          |
| Year fixed effects                  | Yes              | Yes              |
| Number of observations = 3,667      |                  |                  |
| Number of mines = 1,225             |                  |                  |
| F-test                              | 21.05***         | 19.74***         |
| Log pseudolikelihood                | -1,765.35        | -1,764.65        |

Average marginal effects reported. Cluster-robust standard errors at the mine level (in parentheses). All the regressions include an intercept term. * = significant at the 0.05 level; ** at the 0.01 level; *** at the 0.001 level

<!-- image -->

Dependent variable: adoption of mechanical ventilation in year    =  1 (0 otherwise) t

Table 4 Adoption of ventilation in the first year of operation of new mines, 1899-1907 (Robustness check 5.2.5). Logistic model

|                                     | 1 Pooled dy/dx   | 2 Pooled dy/dx   |
|-------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Benefits                            |                  |                  |
| Firedamp  t                         | 0.343***         | 0.269*           |
|                                     | (0.077)          | (0.136)          |
| Number of explosions  t             | 0.222            | 0.221            |
|                                     | (0.151)          | (0.151)          |
| Number of workers/100  t            | 0.300***         | 0.298***         |
|                                     | (0.037)          | (0.037)          |
| Number of workers/100 × Firedamp  t |                  | 0.144            |
|                                     |                  | (0.205)          |
| Share of output mined by machine  t | 0.003***         | 0.003***         |
|                                     | (0.000)          | (0.000)          |
| Costs                               |                  |                  |
| Productivity/100  t                 | 0.013**          | 0.013**          |
|                                     | (0.004)          | (0.004)          |
| Seam thickness  t                   | 0.0001           | 0.0001           |
|                                     | (0.001)          | (0.001)          |
| Number of observations = 1,010      |                  |                  |
| F-test                              | 13.40***         | 12.60***         |
| Log pseudolikelihood                | -519.49          | -519.33          |

The  year  1898  is  not  included.  Average  marginal  effects  reported. Cluster-robust standard errors at the mine level (in parentheses). All the regressions include an intercept term. * = significant at the 0.05 level; ** at the 0.01 level; *** at the 0.001 level.

Table 5 Effects of the adoption of ventilation technology in mines, 1898-1907

|                                     | 1                         | 2                 |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------|
|                                     | Number of explosions  t+1 | Productivity  t+1 |
|                                     | Poisson                   |                   |
|                                     | Correlated RE             | Correlated RE     |
|                                     | Coefficient               | Coefficient       |
| Fan  t                              | -1.083 †                  | 0.373             |
|                                     | (0.637)                   | (0.257)           |
| Firedamp  t                         | 1.564***                  | 0.084             |
|                                     | (0.292)                   | (0.328)           |
| Share of output mined by machine  t | 0.016*                    | 0.009**           |
|                                     | (0.007)                   | (0.004)           |
| Seam thickness  t                   | -0.001                    | 0.038**           |
|                                     | (0.029)                   | (0.014)           |
| Year fixed effects                  | Yes                       | Yes               |
| Number of observations = 2,216      |                           |                   |
| Number of mines = 680               |                           |                   |
| F-test                              | 4.01***                   | 31.15***          |
| R 2                                 |                           | 0.265             |
| Log pseudolikelihood                | -  238.95                 |                   |

In column 1, the Poisson model is preferred to a negative binomial model because no overdispersion is indicated  by  the  test  proposed  by  Cameron  and  Trivedi  (2000,  p.  575).  RE  =  random  effects.  In  order to  put  the  impact of fans in context, specifications in column 1 and column 2 include the same set of explanatory variables. Column 2 suggests that the impact of fans on productivity was weaker (significance at the 0.138 level). The number of workers was added in estimates for both specifications. However,  perhaps  due  to  its  relatively  high  correlation  with  the  fan  variable,  0.42,  the  models  performed worse. Firedamp is constant over time. All the regressions include an intercept term. † = significant at the 0.10 level; * at the 0.05 level; ** at the 0.01 level; *** at the 0.001 level

<!-- image -->

Table 6 Initial costs of furnaces and centrifugal mechanical ventilators. A comparison. Sources : UK Parliamentary Papers (1853, p. 147); Mackworth (1856, p. 73); Atkinson (1892, p. 97); Mativa et al. (1892, p 76); Kerr (1901, p. 334); Wabner (1902, pp.180, 193); Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia (1909, p. 587)

|                                                                   | Cost in $1908   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| Furnaces                                                          |                 |
| In one British mine, c. 1850                                      | 192             |
| Anzin (Pas-de-Calais), c. 1850                                    | 498             |
| Tyne main colliery, c. 1850                                       | 810             |
| In one British mine, c. 1900                                      | 1,359           |
| Centrifugal mechanical ventilators                                |                 |
| Capell fan, Essen, 1889                                           | 4,260           |
| Guibal fan, Westphalia, c. 1990                                   | 5,991           |
| Guibal fan, Liege, 1891                                           | 6,290           |
| Guibal fan, Hainaut, 1882                                         | 6,300           |
| Guibal fan, Hainaut, 1877                                         | 6,663           |
| Average of 4 Capell fans (locations are not avail- able), c. 1900 | 7,067           |
| Guibal fan in one German mine, c. 1900                            | 7,176           |
| Guibal fan, Hainaut, 1886                                         | 7,731           |
| Capell fan, Gelsenkirchen, 1891                                   | 7,750           |
| West Virginia, one mine owner's estimate, 1908                    | ≈ 8,000         |
| Average of 78 Guibal fans, Prussia, c. 1884                       | 8,263           |
| Guiban fan, Saarland, c. 1900                                     | 8,725           |
| Capell fan, Westphalia, 1889                                      | 8,763           |
| Capell fan, Hainaut, 1891                                         | 8,985           |
| Guibal fan in one British mine, c. 1900                           | 13,339          |

Costs  are  expressed  in  1908  dollars  using  Edvinsson,  http://  www. histo  rical  stati  stics.  org

Fig. 3 Most  common  methods  of  ventilation,  A.  Furnace,  B.  Mechanical  ventilator  (Guibal  design) Notes : Figure A.1.B. View from side. Rather than a set of rotary blades, centrifugal fans typically fixed blades onto a cylinder, which spun so as to direct the air flow across the axis of the cylinder rather than parallel to it. Unlike a waterwheel, in which the fluid rotates the wheel to generate power, in centrifugal fans the power source rotates the wheel to push the fluid (air) along. Sources : Wabner (1902, plates IX and XVIII)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 Production and workers in the West Virginia coal basin, 1863-1933, Notes : Production and workers available from 1863 and 1880 onward, respectively. Sources : See Fig. 1

<!-- image -->

D

Fig. 5 Numbers of fans  in  major  bituminous  coalfields:  Pennsylvania  and  West  Virginia,  A.  Absolute numbers, B. Relative numbers, Notes :  Years  used  are  those  where  complete  information for both coal basins  is  available. Sources :  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Internal  Affairs  (1876,  1880,  1884,  1885); Pennsylvania Secretary of Internal Affairs (1889, 1903); WVDM (1883, 1889, 1891, 1893, 1895, 18971909)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Acknowledgements We are especially grateful to two reviewers for their comments, Claude Diebolt as Editor, and William Boal for helping us with the empirical model and data. The latter of whom, together with Mark Aldrich, also suggested bibliographical references. For further comments and different kinds of assistance we thank Leah Craver, at the West Virginia Office of Miners' Health Safety and Training, Jessica  Eichlin,  at  the  West  Virginia  and  Regional  History  Center,  Art  Carden,  Benito  Cuezva  Rubio, Price  Fishback,  Patrick  Gray,  Amanda  Gregg,  Tim  Guinnane,  Laurent  Heyberger,  Naomi  Lamoreaux, Francisco J. Marco-Gracia, Joel Mokyr, Peter Scott, Ana Serrano, Inmaculada Villanúa, Miren Ximénez de Embún, and participants at Ole Miss, Yale, Middlebury (AALAC) and Murcia (DEcIDE) workshops. Roger Fouquet shared with us his unpublished coauthored manuscript.

Funding Open  Access  funding  provided  thanks  to  the  CRUE-CSIC  agreement  with  Springer  Nature. Funding  was  provided  by  Ministerio  de  Ciencia  e  Innovación  (Grant  Nos.  PGC2018-095529-B-I00, PGC2018-096640-B-I00  and  PID2021-123220NB-I00)  and  Departamento  de  Educación,  Cultura  y Deporte, Gobierno de Aragón (Grant No. S55-20R).

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/  licen ses/  by/4.  0/.

## References

Acemoglu D, Restrepo P (2019) Automation and new tasks: how technology displaces and reinstates labor. Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2):3-30

Agricola G (1556 [1950]) De Re Metallica. Dover Publications, Mineola, NY

Aldrich M (1995) 'The Needless Peril of the Coal Mine': the Bureau of Mines and the campaign against coal mine explosions, 1910-1940. Technol Cult 36(3):463-518

Aldrich M (1997) Safety First: technology, labor, and business in the building of American work safety, 1870-1939. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London

Allen  RC  (2009)  The  British  industrial  revolution  in  global  perspective.  Cambridge  University  Press, Cambridge

Allison PD (2009) Fixed-effects regression models. Sage, Los Angeles

Atkinson AA (1892) A key to mine ventilation. Colliery Engineer Co, Scranton

Boal WM (1992) The unionization of West Virginia coal, 1900-1935: a chronology.http://  wmboal.  com/ resea  rch (Last accessed 13 April 2022)

Boal WM (1994) Union response to mechanization in US bituminous coal. Labour Econ 1(3-4):243-267 Boal WM (1995) Testing for employer monopsony in turn-of-the-century coal mining. RAND J Econom 26(3):519-536

Boal WM (2006) New estimates of paid-up membership in the United Mine Workers, 1902-29, by state and province. Labor History 47(4):537-546

Boal  WM  (2009)  The  effect  of  unionism  on  accidents  in  US  coal  mining,  1897-1929.  Ind  Relat 48(1):97-119

Boal WM (2017) The effect of unionization on productivity: evidence from a long panel of coal mines. Ind Labor Relat Rev 70(5):1254-1282

Boal WM (2018) Work intensity and worker safety in early twentieth-century coal mining. Explor Econ Hist 70(4):132-149

Brnich MJ, Kathleen MK-T (2010) Underground coal mine disasters 1900-2010: events, responses, and a look to the future. In: Brune J (ed) Extracting the science. A century of mining research. Society for Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration, Littleton, CO, pp 363-372

Cameron AC, Trivedi PK (2010) Microeconometrics using Stata, Revised. Stata Press, College Station, TX

Ciliberto F (2010) Were British cotton entrepreneurs technologically backward? Firm-level evidence on the adoption of ring spinning. Explor Econ Hist 47(4):487-504

Clark G, Jacks D (2007) Coal and the industrial revolution, 1700-1869. Eur Rev Econ Hist 11(1):39-72 Clayton J (1739) An experiment concerning the spirit of coals. Philosophical Transactions 41: 59-61 Clifford W (1897) Furnace versus fan ventilation. Ohio Mining J 26:67-82

Cohen S (1984 [1999]) King Coal. A pictorial heritage of West Virginia coal mining. Quarrier Press, Charleston

Corbin DA (1981) Life, work, and rebellion in the coal fields. The Southern West Virginia miners, 18801922. University of Illinois Press, Urbana

Cory W (2005) Fans &amp; ventilation. A practical guide. Elsevier, Amsterdam

Cox  D  (1972)  Regression  models  and  life  tables  (with  discussion).  J  Royal  Statistical  Soc  B 34(2):187-220

Dix K (1977) Work relations in the coal industry: the hand-loading era, 1880-1930. West Virginia University Press, Morgantown

Dustmann C (1986) The diffusion of the cutting machine technology in the US bituminous coal industry, 1901-1930. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Georgia

Eavenson  HN  (1942)  The  first  century  and  a  quarter  of  American  coal  industry.  Koppers  Building, Pittsburgh

Edvinsson R. Portal for historical statistics. Historical currency converter: http://  www.  histo  rical  stati  stics. org (Last accessed 8 August 2022)

Eller RD (1982) Miners, millhands and mountaineers. Industrialization of the Appalachian South, 18801930. The University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville

Engerman SH, Rosenberg N (2016) Innovation in historical perspective. In: Diebolt C, Haupert M (eds) Handbook of cliometrics. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 433-445

Fagge R (1996) Power, culture and conflict in the coalfields. West Virginia and South Wales, 1900-22. Manchester University Press, Manchester

Fay AH (1915) Coal fatalities in the United States, 1870-1914. Statistics of coal production, labor, and mining methods, by states and calendar years. US Bureau of Mines Information Bulletin no 15. GPO, Washington, DC

Fieldner AC (1950) Achievements in mine safety research and problems yet to be solved. US Bureau of Mines Information Circular no. 7573. GPO, Washington, DC

Fishback PV (1984) Segregation in job hierarchies: West Virginia coal mining, 1906-1932. J Econ Hist 44(3):755-774

Fishback  PV  (1985)  Discrimination  on  nonwage  margins:  safety  in  the  West  Virginia  CoalIndustry, 1906-1925. Econ Inq 23(4):651-669

Fishback PV (1987) Liability rules and accident prevention in the workplace: empirical evidence from the early twentieth century. J Legal Stud 16(2):305-328

Fishback PV (1992) Soft coal, hard choices: The economic welfare of bituminous coal miners, 1890-

1930. Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford

Fishback PV, Kantor SE (2000) A prelude to the welfare state. The origin of workers' compensation. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago

Forbes JJ, Owings CW (1934) Coal-mine explosions in West Virginia, 1883-1933. US Bureau of Mines Information Circular no. 6802. GPO, Washington, DC

Frey CB (2019) The technology trap. Capital, labor, and power in the age of automation. Princeton University Press, Princeton

Galloway W (1878) On Coal-Dust Explosions Iron 10-11:33-67

Galloway R (1882 [1969]) A history of coal mining in Great Britain. David &amp; Charles Reprints, Newton Abbot

Galloway W (1900) Course of lectures on mining. Spottiswoode &amp; Co., London

Golding C, Katz LF (1998) The origins of technology-skill complementarity. Q J Econ 113(3):693-732

Graebner W (1976) Coal-Mining safety in the progressive period. The political economy of reform. The University Press of Kentucky, Lexington

Greasley  D  (1982)  The  diffusion  of  machine  cutting  in  the  British  coal  industry,  1902-1938.  Explor Econom History 19(3):246-268

Green WH (2012) Econometric analysis. Seventh edition. Pearson Education, Harlow

<!-- image -->

Green WH, Zhang Q (2019) Nonlinear and related panel data models. In: Tsionas M (ed) Panel data econometrics. Theory. Elsevier, London, pp. 45-96

Griliches Z (1957) Hybrid corn: an exploration in the economics of technological change. Econometrica 25(4):501-522

Gruenhagen JH, Parker R (2020) Factors driving or impeding the diffusion and adoption of innovation in mining: a systematic review of the literature. Resources Policy 65, article 101540

Habakkuk HJ (1962) American and British technology in the nineteenth century. Cambridge University Press, London and New York, The search for labour-saving inventions

Hall BH (2005) Innovation and diffusion. In: Fagerberg J, Mowery DC, Nelson RR (eds) The Oxford

handbook of innovation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 459-484

Hinsley FB (1969) The development of coal mine ventilation in Great Britain up to the end of the nineteenth century. Transactions of the Newcomen Society 42(1):25-39

Inwood  K,  Keay  I  (2012)  Diverse  paths  to  industrial  development:  evidence  from  late-nineteenthcentury Canada. Eur Rev Econ Hist 16(3):311-333

Joint Select Committee of the Legislature of West Virginia (1909) Report of hearings before the Joint Select Committee of the legislature of West Virginia. The Tribune Printing Co., Charleston

Jopp T (2017) Did closures do any good? Labour productivity, mine dynamics, and rationalization in interwar Ruhr coal mining. Economic History Review 70(3):944-976

Juhász R, Squicciarini MP, Voigtländer N (2020) Technology adoption and productivity growth: evidence from industrialization in France. NBER Working Paper no. 27503

Katz LF, Margo RA (2014) Technical change and the relative demand for skilled labor. The United States in historical perspective. In: Boustan LP, Frydman C, Margo RA (eds) Human capital in history: the American record. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 15-57

Kelly M, Mokyr J, O'Grada C (2014) Precocious Albion: A new interpretation of the British Industrial Revolution. Annual Review of Economics 6:363-389

Kerr GL (1901) Practical coal mining: a manual for managers, under-managers, colliery engineers, and others. Charles Griffin &amp; Company, London

Khan BZ (2013) Economic history and technological change. In: Whaples R, Parker RE (eds) Routledge handbook of modern economic history. Routledge, London and New York, pp 59-70

Lafortune  J,  Lewis  E,  Tessada  J  (2019)  People  and  machines:  a  look  at  the  evolving  relationship between capital  and  skill  in  manufacturing,  1860-1930,  using  immigration  stocks.  Rev  Econ Stat 101(1):30-43

Long SE (2010) Rural Electrification. In: Keller M, Sullivan K, Waggoner E (eds) e-WV: The West Virginia Encyclopedia https://  www.  wvenc  yclop  edia.  org/  artic  les/  145 (Last accessed 16 August 2022)

Lupton A (1893) Mining. An elementary treatise on the getting of minerals. Longmans, Green &amp; Co., London and New York

Mackworth  H  (1856)  The  ventilation  of  mines,  by  mechanical  and  other  powers.  Ann  Rep  Royal Cornwall Polytech Soc 24:50-82

Macleod C (1988) Inventing the industrial revolution. The English patent system, 1660-1880. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Mativa  H,  Desvachez  E,  Isaac  I,  Evrard  N  (1892)  Les  ventilateurs  de  mines.  Bulletin,  Société  Des Anciens Élèves De L'école Spéciale De Commerce, D'industrie &amp; Des Mines Du Hainaut 2:33-87 McAteer D (2014) Monongah. The tragic story of the 1907 Monongah mine disaster. The worst industrial accident in US History. West Virginia University Press, Morgantown

Ministère d l'Intérieur (1904-1913) Annuaire statistique de la Belgique et du Congo Belge. Imprimerie A Lesigne, Brussels

Ministère des Travaux Publics (1904-1913) Statistique de l'industrie minérale et des appareils à vapeur en France et en Algérie. Imprimerie nationale, Paris

Mokyr J (2009) The enlightened economy. An economic history of Britain, 1700-1850. Yale University Press, New Haven and London

Mokyr J (2010) The contribution of economic history to the study of innovation and technical change: 1750-1914.  In:  Hall  BH,  Rosenberg  N  (eds)  Handbook  of  the  economics  of  innovation,  vol  2. North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp 11-50

Moser P (2018) Innovation and patents in American economic history. In: Cain LP, Fishback PV, Rhode PW (eds) The Oxford handbook of American economic history, vol 2. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 3-21

Mundlak Y (1978) On the pooling of time series and cross section data. Econometrica 46(1):69-85

Murray JE, Silvestre J (2015) Small scale technologies and European coal mine safety, 1850-1900. Econ History Rev 68(3):887-910

Murray JE, Silvestre J (2021) How does it explode? Understanding risk in European mining doctrine, 1803-1906. Technol Culture 62(3):780-811

Nuvolari A, Verspagen B (2009) Technical choice, innovation and British steam engineering, 1800-1850. Econ History Rev 62(3):685-710

Nuvolari A, Verspagen B, von Tunzelmann N (2011) The early diffusion of the steam engine in Britain, 1700-1800: a reappraisal. Cliometrica 5(3):291-321

Olmstead AL, Rhode PW (2008) Creating abundance. Biological innovation and American agricultural development. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Otojanov R, Fouquet, R, Granville B (2020) Factor prices and induced technical change in the industrial revolution. Manuscript

Pennsylvania Department of Internal Affairs (1876 1880 1884 1885) Part III. Industrial statistics annual report. State Printer, Harrisburg

Pennsylvania Secretary of Internal Affairs (1889 1903) Report of the inspectors of mines. State Printer, Harrisburg

Preussische Schlagwetter Commission (1887) Haupt-Bericht der Preussische Schlagwetter Commission. Part II. Verlag von Ernst &amp; Korn, Berlin

Rakes PH (1999) Technology in transition: the dilemmas of early twentieth-century coal mining. J Appalachian Stud 5(1):27-60

Rakes PH (2008) West Virginia coal mine fatalities: the subculture of danger and a statistical overview of the pre-enforcement era. West Virginia History: A J Regional Stud 2(1):1-26

Rice GS (1910) The explosibility of coal dust. US Geological Survey Bulletin no. 425. GPO,Washington, DC

Rice GS, Jones LM (1915) Methods of preventing and limiting explosions in coal mines. US Bureau of Mines Technical Paper no. 84. GPO, Washington, DC

Rice GS, Hartmann I (1939) Coal mining in Europe. A study of practices in different coal formations and under various economic and regulatory conditions compared with those in the United Sates. GPO, Washington, DC

Scott P (2006) Path dependence, fragmented property rights and the slow diffusion of high throughput technologies in inter-war British coal mining. Bus Hist 48(1):20-42

Shurick AT (1922) Coal mining costs. McGraw-Hill, New York

Silvestre J (2022) Productivity, mortality, and technology in European and US coal mining, 1800-1913. In: Gray P, Hall, J, Herndon RW, Silvestre J (eds) Standard of living: Essays on economics, history, and religion in honor of John E. Murray. Springer Nature, Cham, pp. 345-371

Streb J (2016) The cliometric study of innovations. In: Diebolt C, Haupert M (eds) Handbook of cliometrics. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 447-468

The South Shields Committee (1843) The report of The South Shields Committee appointed to investigate the causes of accidents in coal mines. Longman, Brown, Green &amp; Longmans, London

UK Parliamentary  Papers  (1853)  First  report  for  the  Select  Committee  on  Accidents  in  Coal  Mines. London

US Coal Commission (1925) Report of the United States Coal Commission. Part III: Bituminous coaldetailed labor and engineering studies. GPO, Washington, DC

US Commissioner of Labor (1909) Twenty-third annual report. Workmen's insurance and benefit funds in the United States. GPO, Washington, DC

US Geological Survey (1900) 1903 1908 1912) Mineral resources of the United States. GPO, Washington, DC

Uchimura K (2010) Coal operators and market competition: the case of West Virginia's smokeless coalfields and the Fairmont Field, 1853-1933. West Virginia History 4(2):59-86

Wabner R (1902 [1903]) Ventilation in Mines. Scott, Greenwood &amp; Son, London (English translation by Charles Salter)

Wallace AF (1987) ST. Clair. A nineteenth-century coal town's experience with a disaster-prone industry. Alfred A. Knopf, New York

Watteyne V, Meissner C, Desborough A (1908) The prevention of mine explosions. Report and recommendations. US Geological Survey Bulletin no 369. GPO, Washington, DC

West Virginia Department of Mines (1883 1889 1891-1909) Report of the inspectors of mines. The Public Printing Company, Charleston:

<!-- image -->

West Virginia Office of Miners' Health Safety and Training. Production of coal and coke 1863-2019: https://  mines  afety.  wv.  gov/  histo  rical-  stati  stical-  data/  produ  ction-  of-  coal-  and-  coke-  1863-  2013/ (Last accessed 8 March 2021)

Wooldridge JM (2002) Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, and London

Wooldridge  JM  (2020)  Introductory  econometrics.  A  modern  approach.  Seventh  edition.  Cengage, Boston

Wright CD (1905). Coal mine labor in Europe. Twelfth special report of the Commissioner of Labor. GPO, Washington DC

Wright G (1990) Origins of American industrial success, 1879-1940. Am Econ Rev 80(4):651-668

Young WH, Anderson RL (1957) Thickness of bituminous-coal and lignite seams at all mines and thickness of overburden at strip mines in the United States in 1955. US Bureau of Mines Information Circular no. 7812. GPO, Washington, DC

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.