## Gloria Vollmers

## Industrial Home Work of the  Dennison Manufacturing  Company of Framingham, Massachusetts,  1912-1935

Dennison  Manufacturing  Company let work out into private homes in surrounding communities and paid piece  rates  for it for many decades.  This work, primarily attaching strings to tags,  benefited  both  the  company  and  the  community  but contained the potential for abusive child labor. Home work declined  when  machinery  could  be  substituted  for  hand labor, but  machinery  capable  of replacing  all handwork was never developed. Social and political pressures to reduce or eliminate  child  labor  increased  the  incentives  to  end  home work; but not until the depression of the 1930s, when national  efforts  to  put  men  back  to work  gained  momentum,  did home manufacture  end in the tag and other industries.  This article  uses internal  company documents  spanning the period  1912 to  1935 to illuminate  the  company's  policy  towards this work.  It also relies on the recollections of many of those who  performed  the  work  when  they  were  children. This research  contributes  to  a  substantial  body  of  literature  on home work by providing  a case  study on  one  company  and enriching it with human testimony.

GLORIA VOLLMERS is assistant professor in the accounting area at the University of Maine.

I  wish  to  thank  the  Avery-Dennison  Company  for  allowing  access  to  the  Dennison archive  and  providing  copy  facilities. I  am  grateful to  the  many  former  Dennison  tag stringers and other employees who were so willing to tell their stories.  I also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers of the Business History  Review for their thorough, thoughtful,  and enormously helpful work on this  manuscript.

The  information  for  this  article  comes  primarily  from  the  company  archives  in  the Avery-Dennison  administration  building  in  Framingham. The  archives  contain  a  file  on home work, with memos, inspectors reports and other miscellaneous materials spanning the years  1912  to  1935. Annual  internal  company  reports  occasionally  refer  to  outside  work. Telephone  interviews  with stringers and  other retired employees  contributed  to  this research.  Those who would like more information  about the interviewees should contact the author.

Business History  Review 71 (Autumn  1997):  444-470. ' 1997 by The President  and Fellows of Harvard College.

## Introduction

Labor  performed  for  a business  in  the  home  of the  worker,  once  a dominant production  process, declined  as work became  centered  in the  factory. The  industrial  home  work  of  Dennison  Manufacturing Company of Framingham, Massachusetts, consisting largely of attaching strings to tags, began with the founding of the company in 1844 and ended  in  1935. 1 Dennisons  experience  illustrates  some  of  the  economic, social and political forces  that sustained home work long  after most production had moved into the factory.

Competitive  market tensions led the company to retain its home work  system  which,  though  largely  beneficial  to  both  company  and community, contained potential for abuse.  Dennison followed a line of action predictable within a framework  of classical economic decisionmaking  and  transaction-cost  economics. 2 As  cost-saving  machines became available, it substituted them for home workers, but the technology remained problematic.  Machinery could not displace all handwork.  For the residual tasks, it was marginally less expensive for  the company to contract with home workers than to bring them inside its walls.

The  simplicity  of  the  work  permitted  children  to  participate. When Dennison was accused of condoning child abuse, it took steps to mitigate the problem.  In doing so, it increased the cost of its outside work.  Recurrent national and state political efforts  to end child labor, the  increasing cost  of maintaining  the  home  system,  and  the  erratic quality of the finished work provided Dennisons works manager with incentives  to  reduce  the  use  of  outside  workers  and  bring  the  work inside.  Yet the company's home work system did not end until 1935, when  all  tag  manufacturers,  as  members  of  the  Tag  Industry  Code Association (a trade association), jointly agreed to abolish the system.

2 Oliver E. Williamson, "Transaction-Cost Economics:  The Governance of Contractual Relations," The Journal of Law  and Economics 22 (Oct.  1979):  233-261.

## Gloria Vollmers 1446

## Company Background

Aaron Dennison of Brunswick, Maine, started a business making boxes in  his  home  in  1844 for local jewelers  and watchmakers. 3 Eliphalet Dennison, Aaron's brother, took over management of the enterprise in 1849 and began to produce more goods for jewelers.  These included cards for holding and displaying merchandise, fine cotton, tissue paper, and tags for repair claim and price tickets.  Eliphalet bought the business in  1855 and opened  a box factory outside  Boston. He also purchased an agency that imported shipping tags from  London and soon began  manufacturing  tags  domestically  in  Roxbury,  Massachusetts. Dennison's expanding production outgrew the Roxbury factory, and in 1897 the company moved to Framingham to secure larger facilities and access to a railroad siding.  There, the company centralized all production, selling, and administrative operations.

In 1863, Eliphalet formed a partnership in order to raise additional funds  under the name of Dennison and Company.  Not long thereafter,  capitalizing  on the  success  of the tagging operations,  Dennison and  Company began  to produce  additional  lines  of goods, including gummed labels, seals, and sealing wax for jewelers and stationers; for the  home  market,  the  company  made  paper  napkins, colored  tissue papers and, in 1890, crepe paper.

The  firm's manufacturing  processes  included  both  continuous process and batch production.   Dennison produced blank tags, crepe 4 paper, glue, and other goods in bulk.  A sizable traveling sales force and extensive  advertising  in  newspapers  and  magazines  generated  orders from  large and small firms throughout the United States and in overseas markets as well.  The company sold boxes, tags, labels, and seals

- 3 This  background  information  comes  from  the  following  sources: Kim  McQuaid, "Henry S. Dennison and the Science of Industrial Reform,  1900-1950," American Journal of Economics  and  Sociology (Oct.  1977): 79-98; H.  Feldman,  "The  Outstanding  Features  of Dennison  Management," Industrial  Management (Aug., Sept., and Oct.,  1922);  E. P. Hayes, "History  of  the  Dennison  Manufacturing  Company," Journal  of  Economic  and  Business History (Aug. 1929): 467-502;  and Charlotte Heath, "History of the Dennison Manufacturing  Company-II," Journal  of  Economic  and  Business  History (Sept.  1929): 163-202.  Dennison employed Hayes and Heath as historians.  The company began to publish annual reports in  1920 and these provided information  about the primary product lines. Information  on changes in the  classes and ownership  of stock comes from  the  foregoing as well as from Moody's Industrial  Manual for  the years in question.
- 4 Philip Scranton, "Diversity in Diversity: Flexible Production and American Industrialization," Business History Review 65 (Spring 1991):  27-90.  Throughput is the continuous production of a single product, for example, blank tags.  In batch work, after an order is complete, workers stop the machinery to change its specifications  (jigs, dies, ink) for a  different  product  run.

customized by color, company name, and design. Many orders were therefore  unique and required small batch runs.

Dennison  successfully  managed  the  greatest  downside  of  batch production,  which  was  irregular  employment  deriving  from  cyclical demand.  The company's mass production, plus its special orders from a variety of firms, smoothed over the seasonality of its clients' individual industries and enabled Dennison to maintain its work force except during major  national recessions. Retired  employees interviewed  for this  article  confirmed  that job  security was one  of the  advantages  of their work. 5

In 1878, the company incorporated and distributed its voting stock to its owner-managers. By 1910, however, substantial blocks of stock had moved into outside hands.  Henry Dennison  (the works manager and grandson of Eliphalet Dennison) and Charles Dennison (president and nephew of Eliphalet) worried that the outside shareholders would become unduly influential in company affairs. They initiated another reorganization in 1911, pressuring the outside shareholders into giving up their control in return  for preferred  stock with guaranteed  annual dividends. 6

The  Dennisons  issued  new voting stock to current  management. Yet this stock was not transferable, and managers exchanged it for preferred  stock upon their separation  from  the company. Control therefore rested exclusively with active management.  With this governance structure, the  company remained  a de facto  family firm for over one hundred years.  The longest single tenure at the top was that of Henry Sturgis Dennison, who began work in 1899, became president in 1917, and remained so until his death in 1952.  Not until 1967, upon merging with National Blank Book Company, did Dennison  Manufacturing become a publicly-held enterprise.  (The preferred stock had been listed  on  the  New  York  Curb  Exchange.) After  a  merger  in  1990, Dennison became a subsidiary of Avery-Dennison  Incorporated.

Dennisons gross annual sales reached a high of $17 million during the late 1920s but did not again attain that level until the early 1940s. In the 1920s, the company employed between 2,600 and 2,800 people in the factory.  Employment fell to 1,468 by 1932 and thereafter  grad-

## Gloria Vollmers 1448

ually recovered,  reaching  2,200 by  1938. The company also created four retail stores (in Boston, New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia) and two  manufacturing subsidiaries (in Drummondville,  Quebec,  and London,  England). It  engaged  in  five  primary  lines  of  businessboxes, tags, gummed labels and other adhesives, crepe paper, and holiday  goods  (decorations  for  Christmas,  Easter,  and  Halloween). In more recent times, Dennison concentrated on office  and school products, producing hole reinforcements,  gummed labels, index tabs, and binders.  The company also made the ubiquitous plastic fasteners that attach virtually all tags to clothing items in stores.

## The Tag Line

Dennison manufactured  tags for prices and repair claims for jewelers and watch makers as early as the  1850s.  The line soon expanded dramatically. Besides  the  obvious  retail  applications  of tags, they were used for shipping, baggage, and inventory-taking.  This line of business seemed to have a virtually unlimited demand.  While the company routinely produced  millions of tags in bulk, slightly more than half of all production was in runs for special orders.  Customers ordered tags cut into unique shapes (urns, hams) and printed with customized designs in multiple colors.  The sizes ranged from  tiny (5/16" in diameter) to massive  (54"  by  4  1/2"). By  1920,  Dennison  was  manufacturing approximately ten million tags daily.  The tag line's percentage contribution to total sales or net income is unknown. Factory reports  from 1927 to  1929, however,  show that  tag division costs were  forty-seven percent of total factory costs.

The "strings" used to attach the tags to products consisted of various grades of twine, string, silk, and wire.  Some featured barbs for the perforation  of  cloth. Others,  called  deadlocks,  were  paperclip-like metal attachments.  Customers could request tags and strings of a preferred  type and length.

Tags had to be attached to strings, and this step could be done by hand or by machine.  All stringing could be done by hand, but not all by machine. Machines  could handle  a wide range of standard sizes, but adapting a machine to irregular sizes or shapes, delicate paper, silk string, wire, or deadlocks proved problematic.  As a result, hand work was frequently  required.

## Industrial  Home Work of the Dennison Manufacturing  Co.  1449

## Stringing Machines

As production  increased,  stretching the limits of the home work system, the company began to look for stringing machines.  The first such machines  arrived  at  the  factory  for  experimentation  in  1877,  and Dennison engaged an engineer to improve and develop it as a marking tag  stringer. But  years  of work  failed  to  produce  a prototype  sufficiently advantageous  over hand  stringing to justify  additional  investment.  By 1893, the machine could string only two sizes of tags.  Later improvements did increase the number of sizes by the turn of the century, but  there were  no  major  breakthroughs  in the  technology until the twentieth century.

A machine designed in the late 1800s did make the entire process of tag production more efficient,  by allowing the stock to be cut, printed,  and  strung  simultaneously. By 1902, the  company owned  six of these newer machines and six of the older type.  Yet, despite the  efficiency of the new machines, they lacked flexibility and could only produce a few standard tag sizes.  Nevertheless, they were instrumental in the company's decision in 1910 to close one of its home work agencies. The majority of the throughput production was transferred  to machinery in Framingham, leaving the special orders for hand work.

Shipping tags were large and heavy, and were strung with wire.  A different  machine was required.  Analyses indicated that machines on the  market  between  1904  and  1912 would  lower  costs  only  slightly below those of hand stringing, a differential  that  the  company found too narrow when weighed against an immediate cash outlay of $3,000 to  $5,000 for each  machine. Although  Dennison  did put  seven  new machines into service by 1917, shipping-tag technology continued  to plague the company well into the  1930s.  At that time, a new tag was finally  designed to fit the machine, rather than the reverse.

The company never was able to transfer  all stringing to machines. One woman said that she strung tags in the factory until her retirement in 1981.  She had started with Dennison as an inside stringer in 1931 or  1932. When  she  retired,  she  left  behind  four  other  women  still stringing tags by hand.  The company finally developed new methods of  attaching  tags  to  products  rather  than  pursuing  further  stringing machine improvements.

## Gloria Vollmers 1450

## The Dennison Home Work System

From the 1850s onward, huge numbers of Dennison tags were strung by hand in private homes.   To manage the work, the company estab7 lished  local  agencies. The  first  was  in  Falmouth,  Massachusetts  (a Dennison family vacation spot) where thirty to sixty million tags a year were being strung by the late nineteenth century.   Between 1890 and 8 1902, there was so much work that the firm established nine subagencies around Falmouth and opened another agency and three subagencies in Woburn,  Massachusetts. When  the  company  moved  to Framingham,  it  added  agencies  in  the  surrounding  communities  of Ashland,  Milford,  Cordaville,  and  Hopkinton,  and  gradually  phased out those in Falmouth and Woburn.  The agencies were responsible for receiving, distributing, and collecting tags, as well as checking quality and keeping track of workers and their pay.  Agents received a specified commission per thousand tags produced.

When  the  company  moved  to  Framingham,  a  unit called Department  42  became  the  control  center  for  all  work  distributed directly to families from the factory and from the agencies.  Until home delivery  became  the  norm,  the  system  followed  a  simple  pattern. People from participating families arrived at an agency  or  at Department 42 in the morning to pick up materials.  The tag superintendent  confirmed  the  assignment  and  noted  the piece  rate  and due date on the family's card.  Then workers took the tag boxes home, usually returning  them  the  next  day for  inspection  and  issuance  of new work.  On specified  pay days, the family received a check authorizing payment at the factory or at the agency.

- 7 Charlotte Heath  wrote  "A  History  of  Home  Work  as  a  Factor in Dennison Production," for internal use in 1928.  Information  on stringing machines, agencies and rates comes from her work and the supporting documentation  she gathered.

8 The Cincinnati Daily  Gazette published the following letter describing the  Dennison stringing industry on Cape Cod on 23 August 1879:

"The most noticeable industry here is the tying of tags, those small bits of pasteboard attached  to  articles in  the  shops with  the  price  in  figures  or signs. These tags are cut elsewhere and sent in bulk to West Falmouth.  The string is sent in skeins.  The business here is to tie, cut the string in suitable lengths, tie one into each tag, and return it to  the  manufacturer  in  Boston. This...furnishes  occupation  to between  300 and  400 persons,  and  it  involves  an  elaborate  system  of  bookkeeping. The business  has  been carried  on  by a woman  for  the  last 20 years. The  orders  which  once were  filled  in a bushel  basket now require large freight  boxes, and  amount to about 40,000,000 tags a year. The  strings.. .with  a corresponding  number  of tags are given out  to people who are paid 12 to 17 cents a thousand.  Young children tie with their mothers, and even old men, and it is the great resource for pin money in the  community."

## Industrial  Home Work of the Dennison Manufacturing  Co.  1451

An  interviewee,  ninety  years  old  in 1996,  strung  from 1914 through the early 1920s and spoke about those years:

We [four children] strung tags after supper.  You could pick them up every day. My older brother would take his cart  and  call out his number.  The superintendent would check the card and decide how much to give and then we'd have a few days to return them.  We didn't take too many but we weren't poor because my father worked at Dennison.  None of the tags were very hard to do and we did it for only a hour a day and often with friends. It got to be a phrase.  If one of my friends came to call we'd say "sit down and do a bunch." 9

## Contribution to Family Income

Home workers were paid by the piece, per  1,000 tags.  The rates varied  with  the  difficulty  of  the  job. One woman  recalled  that  "some strings were so soft  I wanted  to scream  because  I couldn't  get  them through the holes.  Others were so hard they were like ropes." 10 Tags strung with a single-looped string paid less than those with a doubletwisted wire.  Barbed tags paid the most.  However, all piece rates were low (See Table  1) and  contemporary  studies  show that  tag-stringing was among the lowest paid of all types of home work. 11

The  average  manufacturing  worker  in  the  United  States  earned weekly wages of $10.92 in 1914 and $21.84 and 1919 (Table 3).  Fulltime Dennison factory workers received comparable amounts, according to internal company documents.  Information  about hourly workers is relatively easy to  find,  but  information  about  home  workers is scarce.

- 9 Mary Cahill, telephone interview by author,  1994.
- 10 Mrs. Mildred Read, telephone interview by author, 1994.

11 Caroline  Manning,  "The  Immigrant  Woman  and her Job," Bulletin  of the  Women's Bureau, No.  74, U.S. Department  of Labor  (Washington,  D.C.,  1930), 156;  Mary  Skinner, "Industrial  Home  Work  Under  the  NRA," Children's  Bureau  Publication  No.  234, U.S. Department  of Labor  (Washington,  D.C.,  1936),  15;  Amy Hewes  and  The  Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics, Industrial  Home Work in Massachusetts, The Department of Research, Womens's  Educational  and  Industrial  Union  (Boston,  Mass.,  1915),  48; Amy  Hewes, "Industrial  Home Work of Children-A study made in Providence, Pawtucket,  and  Central Falls, R.I." Children's Bureau Publication No. 100, U.S. DOL (Washington, D.C., 1922), 42. Manning found  that  tags paid  the  second lowest  of five  types  of homework; Skinner  that stringing  earned  the  second  lowest  weekly  income  among  fourteen  types;  and  Hewes,  in Industrial  Home, found  the  paper  goods  industry to  be  the  lowest  paying of  fourteen  surveyed, and in her article for the Children's Bureau  Publication, that stringing was among the three lowest paying.

## Gloria Vollmers 1452

| Table 1 Selected Tag Stringing Rates Where Known:  Internal Documents from  December 1916, December 1917, and May 1928   | Table 1 Selected Tag Stringing Rates Where Known:  Internal Documents from  December 1916, December 1917, and May 1928   | Table 1 Selected Tag Stringing Rates Where Known:  Internal Documents from  December 1916, December 1917, and May 1928   | Table 1 Selected Tag Stringing Rates Where Known:  Internal Documents from  December 1916, December 1917, and May 1928   | Table 1 Selected Tag Stringing Rates Where Known:  Internal Documents from  December 1916, December 1917, and May 1928   | Table 1 Selected Tag Stringing Rates Where Known:  Internal Documents from  December 1916, December 1917, and May 1928   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Type of Tag                                                                                                              | 1928 Rates per 1,000                                                                                                     | Rates around 1917                                                                                                        | Rates before World Warl                                                                                                  | Hourly Machine Output                                                                                                    | Approximate Hourly Output by  Hand                                                                                       |
| Silk Marking                                                                                                             | 0.25                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                          | 9M                                                                                                                       | 500                                                                                                                      |
| "C"  Marking                                                                                                             | 0.18                                                                                                                     | 0.18                                                                                                                     | 0.12                                                                                                                     | 6M                                                                                                                       | 722                                                                                                                      |
| Looped Shipping                                                                                                          | 0.10                                                                                                                     | 0.08                                                                                                                     | 0.06                                                                                                                     | 5M                                                                                                                       | 1,300                                                                                                                    |
| Double Wired Shipping                                                                                                    | 0.13                                                                                                                     | 0.11                                                                                                                     | 0.08 or 0.09                                                                                                             | 5M                                                                                                                       | 1,000                                                                                                                    |
| Single Wired Shipping                                                                                                    | 0.15                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                          | 0.11                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                          | 870                                                                                                                      |

The  1928 rates were set to yield about  13 cents per hour.  The 1917 rates were set to yield from  10 to 13 cents per hour.

The pre-war rates were set to yield from  8 to 10 cents per hour.

In all periods, if tags were numbered and inspected by the stringers, an extra 2 cents per hour was allowed.

In  three  reports  dated  1913 and 1914, inspectors  summed up monthly results.  In January 1913, 564 home worker families were paid $3,527.35.  The smallest amount earned was $0.10, the largest $43.00 and  the  average  $6.20. In  February  1914, 910 families  received $5,645.25.  The smallest amount earned was $0.10, the largest $54.65 and the average, $6.20  In May 1914, 719 families  earned $4,129.03. The  highest  pay was $41.20  and the  average,  $5.74. The largest amounts  approximated  the full-time  average monthly wage but most families earned much less. 12

Some women  told the inspector  that  the money helped pay for rent,  clothing,  and miscellaneous  extras. Few families  relied  on tag stringing  exclusively. Since  rent  in  1915 averaged  $15 a month in Massachusetts, 13 earnings  of  $6.20  contributed  substantially  to  that

13 Hewes, Industrial  Home Work in Massachusetts, xxii.  Also, Hewes, "Industrial Home Work of Children," 20, reported that 36% paid between $12.50 and $20 a month for rent and

| Table 2 Selected Rates Set by the Tag Industry Code Authority   | Table 2 Selected Rates Set by the Tag Industry Code Authority   | Table 2 Selected Rates Set by the Tag Industry Code Authority   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Description  of Job                                             | Rate per  1,000 from  1 August  to 1 November  1934             | Rate per 1,000  after 1 November  1934                          |
| Loop                                                            | $0.25                                                           | $0.33                                                           |
| Loop and Knot                                                   | 0.37                                                            | 0.49                                                            |
| Pull Through and Knot                                           | 0.35                                                            | 0.46                                                            |
| Loop and Knot with Barbs                                        | 0.75                                                            | 1.00                                                            |
| Silk Strung Jewelry Tags                                        | 0.25                                                            | 0.33                                                            |
| Merchandise Tags                                                | 0.25                                                            | 0.33                                                            |

These rates, though expressed per 1,000s, needed to meet the NRA minimum of 33 cents an hour.  Clearly some jobs took longer than others.

expense. Table 4 contains prices  of common  foodstuffs. In  1914, a thousand  tags, or about  one hour's work, would buy a pound  loaf of bread, and two thousand tags a pound of chuck roast.

These dollar amounts seem low, but they were not trivial. If  the family brought in $6 a month in home work earnings in 1914 and one of them worked for  Dennison  (which seems to have been the typical case), then  home work contributed  about  10% to their total income. Home work earnings may have lifted  some families out of poverty.  In later years, home work did not contribute as much since the cost of living (Table 3) increased more rapidly than did piece rates. Nevertheless, a relatively few hours of work could still purchase some basic necessities.  Since even the very young could contribute, the larger  the  family,  the  greater  its  potential  earnings. One  interviewee recalled receiving approximately  $11 in home work earnings in 1927. With this money she took the trolley to Boston and bought a two-piece knit suit for $2.98, a trench  coat for  $3.00, shoes for  $1.00, and some fruit. 14

## Gloria Vollmers 1454

| Table 3 Selected Statistics 1914-1934   | Table 3 Selected Statistics 1914-1934                    | Table 3 Selected Statistics 1914-1934   | Table 3 Selected Statistics 1914-1934   |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Year                                    | Average Annual Earnings per  Full-time Employee  in Mfg' | Average Weekly Earnings 2               | Consumer Price Index 1914=100 3         |
| 1914                                    | $696                                                     | $10.92                                  | 100.00                                  |
| 1915                                    | 661                                                      | 11.22                                   | 101.10                                  |
| 1916                                    | 751                                                      | 12.63                                   | 108.70                                  |
| 1917                                    | 883                                                      | 14.97                                   | 127.70                                  |
| 1918                                    | 1,107                                                    | 19.12                                   | 150.00                                  |
|                                         |                                                          |                                         | 172.50                                  |
| 1919                                    | 1,293                                                    | 21.84                                   |                                         |
| 1920                                    | 1,532                                                    | 26.02                                   | 199.70                                  |
| 1921                                    | 1,346                                                    | 21.94                                   | 178.10                                  |
| 1922                                    | 1,283 1,403                                              | 21.28 21.50                             | 166.90 169.70                           |
| 1923                                    | 1,427                                                    | 21.63                                   | 170.30                                  |
| 1924                                    |                                                          |                                         | 174.80                                  |
| 1925                                    | 1,450                                                    | 21.99                                   |                                         |
| 1926                                    | 1,476                                                    | 22.29                                   | 169.70                                  |
| 1927                                    | 1,502                                                    | 22.55                                   | 170.30                                  |
| 1928                                    | 1,534                                                    | 22.42                                   | 174.80                                  |
| 1929                                    | 1,543                                                    | 22.47                                   | 170.90                                  |
| 1930                                    | 1,488                                                    | 21.40                                   | 166.40                                  |
| 1931 1932                               | 1,369 1,150                                              | 20.09 17.26                             | 151.50 136.10                           |
| 1933                                    | 1,086                                                    | 16.76                                   | 128.80                                  |
| 1934                                    |                                                          |                                         |                                         |
|                                         | 1,153                                                    | 17.73                                   | 133.30                                  |

## Attack and Response

The persistence of home work outraged many critics who believed that it led to a variety of evils.  They accused the practice of undercutting male wages,  encouraging  cutthroat  competition,  exploiting  children, and  transmitting  diseases  from  home  worker  to  customer. Because

Table 4 Retail Prices of Selected Foods in U.S. Cities

|   Year |   Flour  5 lbs. | Bread  1 Ib.   |   Chuck  Roast  1 Ib. |   Butter  1 Ib. |   Eggs  1 dz. |   Potatoes  10 lbs. | Navy  Beans  1 Ib.   |   Coffee  1 Ib. |   Sugar 5 lbs. |
|--------|-----------------|----------------|-----------------------|-----------------|---------------|---------------------|----------------------|-----------------|----------------|
|   1914 |            17   | 6 . 3          |                  16.7 |            36.2 |          35.3 |                18   | -                    |            29.7 |           29.5 |
|   1920 |            40.5 | 11.5           |                  26.2 |            70.1 |          68.1 |                63   | 11.4                 |            47   |           97   |
|   1925 |            30.5 | 9 . 3          |                  22.8 |            55.2 |          55.4 |                36   | 10.3                 |            50.4 |           35   |
|   1930 |            23   | 8 . 6          |                  28.6 |            46.4 |          44.5 |                36   | 11.7                 |            39.5 |           30.5 |
|   1935 |            25.3 | 8 . 3          |                  24   |            36   |          37.6 |                19.1 | 6 . 2                |            25.7 |           28.2 |

Source: Historical Statistics of the  U.S. from  Colonial Times to 1970, Series E  187-202.  All amounts are in cents per  unit.

homework paid  so poorly, it  forced  women  to labor  for  exhaustingly long hours.  It could lead to excessive child labor, neglect by mothers of their children and other duties, and, in general, cause damage to the health of the family unit.  Such concerns spurred many studies of home work  in  the  1910s  and  1920s  by  the  "Women's  Bureau"  and  the "Children's  Bureau" of the Department  of Labor as well as by academics. 15 Popular  magazines  and  local  newspapers  inveighed  against firms that  used  home workers, particularly because  of the impact on children. 16 (Though  it  has  diminished,  home  work  has  not  disappeared.  It persists throughout the country and a literature of substantial size accompanies its controversial continuance. 17 )

15 A partial  list  of  federal  and  state  government  publications  include: Emily  Brown, "Industrial  Home Work," Bulletin  of the  Women's  Bureau,  No.  79, U.S. DOL  (Washington, D.C., 1930), 9; Manning, "The Immigrant Woman and her Job," (1930); Skinner, "Industrial Home  Work  Under  the NRA,"  (1936);  "Industrial Home-Work  Legislation and Its Administration," Division  of  Labor  Standards  Bulletin  No.  26, U.S.  DOL,  (Washington, D.C., 1939); Hewes, Industrial  Home Work in Massachusetts, and "Industrial Home Work of Children."  Academic works include: Mary Van Kleeck "Child Labor in Home  Industries," The  Annals  of  the  American  Academy  of  Political and  Social  Science 35  (March  1910): Supplement  145-9; and  Ruth  Shallcross, Industrial  Homework: An  Analysis  of  Homework Regulation Here and Abroad, (New York,  1939), 193-195.  Shallcross did not favor  abolishing homework  and offered  well-reasoned  arguments to support her position. See her  concluding chapter.

Mary Hopkins, "Children  in  Bondage: Turning Children's  Homes  into  Factories," Good Housekeeping Magazine 56 (June  1913):  743-752; Edwin Markham "The Sweat-Shop Inferno," Cosmopolitan 42 (Jan.  1907):  330-1; "Where  Babies Work," Wheeling, Va., News, (7 Jan. 1913); "Child Labor Horrors," Sioux Falls Argus-Leader (16 Jan. 1913).

17 Eileen Boris, "Regulating Industrial Homework: The  Triumph of Sacred Motherhood," The Journal of American  History 71 (March  1985):  745-763.  For case stud-

## Gloria Vollmers 1456

Dennison was in no way unaware of these criticisms.  In 1912 and 1913, The  Boston American published  a  series  of  articles  about  the children who were stringing the Dennison tags:

In many instances these babies of the industrial world (5 and 6 year olds) start work before school begins, resume their tag-stringing during the noon recess, and hurrying home after  school are kept constantly at work until almost midnight.  Their daily allotment of tags in bags, soap-box carts, baby carriages, or clutched  tightly in their arms, these little ones can be seen passing to and from the factory at all hours of the day. 18

A Framingham policeman peeked in and saw the three younger girls locked in the house and stringing tags for dear life. In one month five  children strung 289,000 tags. 19

The  Dennison  Company  knew,  of  course,  that  children  were stringing some of its tags.  Families had been doing so for decades and many of them now lived adjacent  to the factory, working in groups on their  porches  and  front  steps. The  company  routinely  issued  work numbers to children who picked up and delivered the tags under their own  names. Sometimes  children  even  strung  tags  on  the  factory grounds,  creating  logistical  problems  for  employees  arriving  in  the morning.  There were no labor laws that applied to children engaged in home work until 1913, when Massachusetts extended an existing law forbidding  the  employment  of children  under  the  age of fourteen  in factories to include home  manufacture. 20

Criticism  from The Boston American articles  and  other  sources stung the company. Dennison was the largest employer in Framingham, a town of about 17,000, and it had been accustomed to good  community  relations. It  created  the  position  of  "Inspector  of Home  Work"  and  hired  the  first  of  a  series  of  women  inspectors. Duties included looking for excess child labor (loosely defined  as children working late at night), investigating reports of poor school attendance or tardiness that might be attributable to tag work, and ensuring that it be permitted only in homes found to be clean and free from contagious  disease. The  inspector  withheld  work  at  her  discretion  and confronted  families whose work was poor.  She chose which homes to visit and reported regularly. 21

Surviving  inspectors'  reports  span  only  the  years  1912  to  1918, although the position  continued  until home work ended  in  1935.  At that  time,  members  of  the  Tag  Industry  Code  Association  jointly banned home work in their industry. 22 The inspectors' reports mirror the concerns  of contemporary  researchers  and  critics  of home work, i.e.  school problems,  health  and  sanitary conditions. The  inspectors also conveyed  workers'  complaints  and  expressed  other  concerns  of their  own. The  reports  offer  insights  into  the  relationship  between Dennison and its home workers and into the company's efforts to comply with state, and later federal, laws.

Workers themselves often  objected to aspects of the system, such as the  long lines  at  the  tag  room  and  the  pay window,  the  inconvenience of pay dates, the times pay could be picked up, and the lengthy delay in  replacing lost  checks. The  company responded  to  some of these protests.  The supervisor began distributing materials twice a day. Pay dates and times changed.  Lost checks were replaced immediately. When some complained that the pay was short by the time their children returned home with it, Dennison began to issue receipts along with the money.  If simple modifications eased the burden on mothers, the company responded quickly. On the other hand, protests about the low piece rates fell on deaf ears. 23

Dennison could not control the quantity of home work available, since it filled an overflow function  for tag production and could not be guaranteed. In an attempt to be fair, the company sometimes  spread the work by limiting the  amount  given to any one family. However,

- 21 Inspector's  reports, 3 Feb.  1913 and 6 March  1913, Homework File.
- 22 Approximately 30 reports exist.
- 23 Inspectors  reports, 3  Feb.  1913, 2  Jan.  1917, Homework  File. Heath,  Charlotte, "Homework as a Factor in Dennison Production," Homework File, 1928, 6.

## Gloria Vollmers 1458

when production declined substantially, many had to be turned away. At those times, Framingham workers argued that the outside agencies should be shut down.  In fact, as demand shrank, Dennison closed the agencies  and  many  families  moved  from  outlying  areas  to  neighborhoods near the factory for that reason. 24

School  officials  sometimes  reported  poor  attendance  or  chronic tardiness  directly  to  the  company. If  the  inspector  decided  that  tag work had been  responsible for the  school problems, she would withhold work. It  appears  that  mothers  were  usually  able  to  satisfy  the inspector that other causes were at fault.  Of thirty-one reports of irregular  school  attendance  in  January  1913, none  could  be  definitively attributed to tag work.  On the other hand, in March, five families had work suspended.  School officials  also asked that families be reinstated when school problems ceased. 25

In addition to reacting to school complaints, Dennison set policies to prevent the problems from  recurring.  In 1913, the  superintendent of Department 42 began to distribute tags earlier in the day so the children would not be late for school.  He also took the name of any child who came to the tag room during school hours.  After three violations, he withheld work and the inspector visited the family to discuss the situation. 26

Finding children who worked  to excess was not easy. In  March 1913 the inspector found only one instance of children working late at night. But sympathetic neighbors, barking dogs, and  simple surveillance of the street made fooling the inspector an easy task.  Many people  interviewed  for  this  article  spoke  with  some  amusement  about eluding inspectors.  There were rumors that some families sought legal guardianship for orphans or foster  children only to benefit  from  their tag work.  The inspector asked that no work be given to families with foster children between the ages of eight and fourteen  after  overhearing women discuss taking state children for that purpose. No formal response to this request is extant. 27

The company began delivering and picking up tags by horse and cart in  1916.  Tag production was high because of war shipments and Dennison needed more home workers.  It found itself forced to transport  the  stock  to  those  living  further away. For  safety  reasons, Dennison  also  made  it  a policy  to  deliver  the  heaviest  boxes  (some

- 25 Inspectors reports, 25 Feb.  1913 and  6 March 1914, Homework File.
- 26 Inspectors reports, 3 Feb.  1913 and 25 Feb.  1914, Homework File.
- 27 Inspector's report, 3 Feb.  1914, Homework File.

## Industrial  Home Work of the Dennison Manufacturing  Co.  1459

exceeding eighty pounds) rather than have home workers pick them up at  the  factory. Home delivery was common  in other local industries and many women told the inspector in 1917 that they would be willing to take in Dennison s work only if it were delivered to them.  Although the  expansion  of the  service was no doubt  influenced  by a variety of factors  (some to be considered later in this article), the company soon favored it above having people come to the factory.  By 1919, Dennison hauled eighty percent of the work to homes and, by some point in the 1920s, all of it. 28

## Incentives to Reduce Home Work Increase

On  1 September  1917, Congress passed  a Federal  Child  Labor law, which covered home work.  It restricted child labor by age, hours, and time of day.  Dennison s management  responded by refusing  to issue work numbers to anyone under the age of seventeen and by tightening their  rules  regarding  children  on  company  grounds. Children  could still pick  up  and  deliver  tags, but  none  were  allowed  to  string  them near the factory  or the  agencies.  The company continued to inspect the homes noting that: "We are able to go beyond the letter of the law and refuse to allow a mother to take tags if she overworks her children on them, or if she is not a sufficiently  competent  mother  so that  her children's school attendance is regular and prompt." 29

Dennison could not monitor the amount of time children worked in the home.  Only ending the work entirely could have stopped any excessive child labor, but the company was unwilling to take that step. Instead,  it  made  symbolic  gestures,  such  as registering  families  only under adult names.  This step formalized  the image that the company wanted to project-that  the work was meant for adults, not children. Since children  no longer drew tag assignments  directly, the responsibility for their labor shifted  back to the parents.  The policy of ensuring that children did no work on its property had a similar goal.  If children were not seen, then it became possible to say that they were not working or that  their work was unknown  to the company. The symbolism of these acts is obvious when set against the fact that the company still allowed children to transport the goods.  Dennison could not insist that  adults  make the deliveries because that would have cut off

their primary supply of labor-mothers with small children.  Overall it is likely that  this law actually encouraged  Dennison's expansion of its home delivery system. 30

The entry of the United States into World War I in 1917 spurred a massive increase in tag production which had consequences for home work.  Families could now take as much work as they wanted.  Where three  or  four  thousand  tags  had  been  a  typical  day's  load,  children began  to  transport  between  five  and  ten  thousand  tags  at  a  time. Home workers increasingly missed deadlines and the quality of their work  suffered. 31

It  had  always been  a Dennison policy to keep records of families who  missed  due  dates  or  whose  work  was  below  par. Managers reduced  pay when  tags were  improperly  strung,  damaged  or  soiled, and chronic problems meant suspension.  When the work was poor, or numbered tags were not packed in order, the tag room personnel had to  make  the  necessary  corrections. The problems  generated  by the wartime  production  surge  played  a large  part  in  causing  Dennison's works  manager,  Thomas  Portmore,  to  consider  ending  home  work entirely. 32

Portmore wanted to end home work both because of outside pressures and problems with quality.  Social and political sentiment against home work was building in both the state and the country as a whole. As noted  earlier,  Massachusetts  had  extended  its  child  labor  law to include home work in 1913.  In the following year, the  Massachusetts State  Board  of  Labor  recommended  (in  vain)  the  legal  abolition  of home work. 33 After the 1917 Federal child labor law was found unconstitutional  in  1918,  Congress  tried  another  approach. In  1919,  it imposed  a ten  percent  excise  tax  on  the  net  profits  of  any business which 1) employed children under fourteen-including in the homeor 2) employed children between fourteen  and sixteen for  more than eight hours in any day or more than six days or after  7 P.M. or before 6 A.M.  The  Supreme  Court  found  the Act unconstitutional  in 1922. While neither the state nor the Federal government was able to sustain or ensure compliance with their laws, their repeated efforts  threatened an abrupt end to home work. 34

- 30 Heath, "Homework as a Factor in Dennison Production,  12-13.
- 31 Inspector's  report, 2 Jan.  1917, Homework  File.
- 32 "History File  1919" and "History File  1920," Homework  File.
- Industrial  Home Work in  Massachusetts,
- 33 The proposed law can be found in Hewes, xi-xii.
- 34 The  home work division of the  Massachusetts  State  Board of Labor and  Industries, responsible  for  inspecting  and  regulating  child  labor,  was  abolished  in  August  1914. The Massachusetts Department of Labor and Industries took over those functions in 1919 but did not issue reports on child labor until 1926.

Dealing with a home labor force was sometimes chaotic, and work quality was erratic.  Dennison could not prevent children under  fourteen  from  stringing or older children  from  stringing long hours  or at night. Moreover, the additional costs for reworking poorly done jobs, the salaries of the inspectors and drivers, as well as stabling, and later trucking,  costs,  reduced  the  economic  advantages  of  home  work. Portmore believed that closer supervision would solve all these problems. 35

Portmore s first  attempt  to reduce  outside work took the  form  of offering  full-time  factory  positions  to  stringers  in  1917. At this  time production  and the  demand  for  stringers was high  and  quality problems were proliferating. Few people took his offer. He was unable to attract sufficient  additional people to handle the extra work. 36

There were compelling reasons why.  Stringing was the lowest paying job in the factory. 37 When the inside stringers in 1917 had trouble meeting  the  company-established  minimum  wage  of  $7.00  a  week, Portmore  ordered  time  studies  and  training  sessions  to  help  the women speed up.  Because of the difficulty  in meeting even the minimum  amount,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  women  could  have  generated much extra income by being more efficient. Simple calculations tell the story.  At $7 for a 54-hour work week, and assuming a piece rate of $.10 per  thousand,  the  stringers were  expected  to complete  approximately 1,300 tags every hour.  It bears mentioning that Dennison's factory jobs were gender-based. Men probably would not have taken or been offered  stringing jobs. 38

Dennison  management  never  considered  raising  the  rates  to attract workers.  Two factors were at work here.  First, the tag business was very competitive, so sale prices had to be kept low.  Second, raising the piece  rates for  any one group usually generated  antagonisms among employees.  Dennison always moved cautiously when changing rates. 39

- 35 "History File 1917," "History File 1919," and "History File 1920," Homework File.
- 38 Report of Inspector Walmsley, 2 Jan. 1919, Homework File.
- 37 In 1935,  the Voluntary  Code  Agreement Between  Tag Manufacturers published stringing rates for the industry.  The minimum wage for women  (33 cents an hour) was the base rate, not that for men  (40 cents).
- 38 "Personnel  Annual  Report  1943" and  "History  File  1942."  The  "Personnel  Annual Reports"  were  books  prepared  annually  by  the  Director  of  Personnel. They  are  located together in a file cabinet  marked similarly.  Additionally, many respondents who worked for the company distinguished between women's and men's jobs.  Charles Hall, letter to author 15 Aug. 1994.

fi "History File, 1915," "History File, 1917," and "Cost Department  Report, Spring and May 1918."  Note:  The frequent  references  throughout the books and memos in the archive made to checking the rates by time study and comparing them to state averages  underscores the care company management took in setting and changing rates.

## Gloria Vollmers 1462

There were other reasons why women may have preferred  working at home rather than entering the factory. Full-time  employment required child care.  This, as for women today, was a substantial problem.  For many, home work was pleasant when shared.  Positive family and community feelings about working together were evident in the interviews conducted  for this article. More than one person recalled that  neighboring  families  would  gather  to  work  and  talk  and  each would help the other finish.  The children's contributions made it more lucrative  as well. Finally,  the  prospect  of  stringing  tags  under  close supervision for fifty-four  hours a week, where previously one had been able to pick it up and put it down at will, lacked appeal.  It is not surprising that many were willing to work at home but unwilling to enter the factory. 40

In 1919, and again in 1920, Thomas Portmore tried to reduce outside labor. The quality problems that  multiplied  during the war and the  new Federal  excise  tax contributed  to his urgency. "We wish to make plans to bring this work inside before  we are compelled by law to take this step." 41 He estimated that the cost of home stringing was now close to that for tags strung entirely inside.  Rather than trying to attract  the workers, he approached the  director of the tag division to study the problem and to encourage the research department to develop new machines. 42

Abnormally  strong business  in  1919 and  1920  made  these  measures unnecessary, at least for a time.  Total revenues rose by 50% during 1920, increasing production so much that, far from decreasing, outside work expanded by 30% from  1919 to 1920.  Two additional agencies  opened  in  Milford  and  Marlboro. Outside  employees  strung approximately 240 million tags in 1920. 43 It was not until 1921 that the rush of tag orders ended, the outside payroll returned to its 1919 level, and the two new agencies were closed. 44

With  the  tremendous  increase  in  business  for  the  factory  as  a whole, Portmore s time was undoubtedly circumscribed by managerial demands  while  those  who  might  have  worked  on  developing  new stringing machines were busy maintaining active machinery.  In addi-

- 40 Louise  Little,  telephone  interview  by  author,  1994;  Mrs  Mildred  Read,  telephone interview  by  author,  1994;  Eleanor  Capellos,  telephone  interview  by  author,  1994;  Mrs. Curren,  telephone  interview  by  author,  1994;  Mary Cahill,  telephone  interview  by  author, 1994; Terry Hastie, letter to author, 28 Sept. 1994.
- 41 Dennison  History File, 1920, Homework  File.
- 42 Dennison  History File, 1920, Homework  File.
- 43 Dennison  History File, 1920, Homework  File.
- 44 Dennison  History File, 1921, Homework  File.

tion,  political  and  social  pressures  to  end  home  work,  which  were strong in the second half of the  1910s, seem to have slackened in the wake of the war and the  subsequent  depression. By 1923, however, political pressure was again rising.  A campaign was mounting to pass a child labor amendment to the United States Constitution. 45

Portmore now tried another approach to the home work problem. He asked the company's Merchandising Committee in 1923 to develop and  market  only tags that  could  be  strung by machine. He  also urged the sales department to avoid, or at least not encourage, orders that  forced  the  company  to  use  home  workers. Evidence  of  the response  of either  group  is circumstantial  and  contradictory. Home work  had  declined  by  1928,  so  efforts may  have  been successful. Identical orders were given ten years later, however, when the law terminated home work, indicating a limited response by marketing and sales.  Ambivalence was inevitable.  The sales and production  functions of the company often worked at cross purposes.  If salesmen reduced the options that  made their products  so appealing, they risked losing business and commissions.  Unless convinced that home work posed a major  problem,  they would  not  likely do  anything  that  would  lower their incomes.

In 1923, Dennison s Industrial Relations Committee proposed creating a department for part-time stringing of tags because output was running  twenty  percent  above  1922  levels. Though  the  record  is sketchy, the idea was discarded.  For whatever reason, the Committee decided that the proposal would not end the child labor problem. In addition, "the methods of payment within and without the factory and the differences  in the amount paid per thousand would result in misunderstandings  and disputes."  They intended to pay the  part-timers less  than  other  employees  doing  the  same  work  and  expected  this would cause problems.  They also feared that workers in other parts of the factory would begin asking for part-time  employment. 46

Outside stringing acted as a safety valve, expanding and contracting with demand.  The company was unwilling to hire enough people to handle its maximum needs.  If Dennison did this, when demand fell it would either have to lay off workers (which Dennison always tried to avoid) or  pay  idle employees (an  equally  unattractive solution). Alternatively,  if  managers  hired  only enough  people  to  handle  their

average  production  needs,  the  company  would  not  be  able  to  meet surges in demand. The flexibility of the outside labor force  substantially benefited  the company, making it unwilling to end home work.

In  1928, the  company's  historian  compiled  an  account  of  home work.  Drawing information from the archive and from interviews with past and current tag line managers and inspectors, she wrote that outside  stringing had been  steadily declining and  that the  company was trying to reduce it further  still. Home workers strung approximately 276 million tags annually.  Piece rates were higher than they had been ten years  earlier, yielding approximately  thirteen  cents per hour  (see Table I). 47

The evidence backs this assertion.  Since the total amount paid to outside  workers  in  1928 was  about  the  same  as that  paid  in 1918$56,500-and the rates per  1,000  had increased from  11 to 13 cents, the  amount  of outside work must have declined by about  79 million tags. 48 Such calculations are imprecise since piece rates varied, but the direction is clear.  The last agency closed in 1928, confining all work to Framingham and its neighbor, Saxonville.  Many internal sources said there had been  a decline, 49 yet nearly all of the annual reports of the 1920s indicate an increase in tag orders.  Whether the decline in home work reflected  an increase  in  mechanization  or  a drop  in  orders  for specialized tags or both is unknown.

By the end of 1928, Dennison was delivering all home work to its employees. Though  more costly, the practice  served  several positive purposes.  Workers no longer had to wait in line, saving them time and inconvenience.  The company avoided broken boxes and damaged or soiled  tags. It  also  minimized  risks  of  unintentionally  violating  the Massachusetts child labor law.  Children had been banned from working on factory grounds since 1917, but since they were no longer picking  up  tags  on  company  property,  this  prohibition  became  easier  to

47 Unfortunately, information  does not prove a decline.  The two references to the number of tags strung annually show an increase.  The  1920 annual history reported  240 million (a year in which outside stringing was said to be running 30% above normal) and Heath said 276 million in  1928.  However,  since Heath  (1928) wrote her history for  internal use, there is little reason to doubt her statement that home work declined.  The 1920 number  appeared in the company's annual history and consisted of a compilation of individual summaries written by managers and committee chairmen, which may be in error.

48 Outside  stringing  payroll  for  the  years  in  which  it  was  reported: 1912-$59,544, 1913-$50,947,  1914-$47,711,  1915-$40,034,  1916-$52,623,  1917-$55,142,  1918-$56,584, 1919-$62,251,  1920-$88,651,  1921-$58,641,  1927-$62,072,  1928-$56,521,  1930-$39,949. Source:  History files  for successive years and factory cost reports for  1928 and  1930.

49 Heath,  "Homework  as  a  Factor  in  Dennison  Production,"  1 and  13. Memo  from Rhoda Mahar, Inspector, to Charlotte Heath, dated 6 April 1928; Thomas Portmore's  report to Directors  dated  1 Oct.  1932, Homework  File.

## Industrial  Home Work of the Dennison Manufacturing  Co.  1465

enforce. Nor could the company be blamed any more for school tardiness.  Finally, home distribution, now the responsibility of the truck drivers, allowed the company to monitor the amount of work each family received and so control excess child labor. 50

Despite the decline of outside work, management lacked a strong commitment to end it entirely.  Annual company histories rarely mentioned  the  subject. Thomas  Portmore  may have  been  the  only  top manager with strong opinions about it.  From  a financial  perspective, outside work simply was not important. It  accounted  for  only three percent of the total costs of the tag division in 1928 and 1.5 percent of all  factory  costs. Savings  from  bringing  this work  inside  the  factory would have been small.  The failure  to ratify  the  Federal  child labor amendment in 1925 reduced external pressure for change.  The company continued to make money on home work, and people in the community sought such employment.

## The Thirties

The Great Depression hit Dennison Manufacturing hard.  Net income fell  by  two-thirds  from  1929 to  1930. Production  dropped,  forcing Dennison  to  lay  off 15%  of  its factory workers  by  mid-1930. Employment in 1931 was only 50% of the 1929 level, and in that and the subsequent year Dennison lost money for the first time in its history. 51

In  March  1931, a  cost  analysis  showed  that  machine  stringing, when possible, cost 2.1 to 4.1 cents per thousand less than hand work. 52 Customers, however, continued to order tags that machines could not finish.

The head of the Tag Division announced in October 1932 that the company would reverse its policy and expand home work.  Customers had submitted  a number  of specialty orders which, given the  serious

50 The  rationing  of  tags  according  to  the  number  of  adults  in  a  family  had  been  the responsibility of the tag room supervisor or the agent.  With home delivery handling 100% of the work, the truck drivers became responsible  for rationing tags according to company policy. However, many respondents remembered that the truck drivers gave their mothers as many boxes of tags as they wanted.  Nelli Guidi, telephone interview by author, 1994; Eleanor Capellos, telephone  interview by author,  1994; Mary Cahill, telephone  interview by author, 1994; Lorraine  Pavia,  telephone  interview by author,  1994; Angela  Surro, telephone  interview by author,  1994; and Tina Stefanini,  telephone interview by author,  1994.

Moodys Manual of Investments  1905-1932. See also Dennison s Annual  Reports  to Stockholders from 1920-1932.

52 W. Wentworth to T. Portmore, 9 March  1931, Homework File.

economic condition, the company could not turn down.  "This change in policy.. .has helped the factory and also the people of the town and I think it should be continued as long as the present industrial situation exists." 53 At  the  same  time,  piece  rates  fell  back  to  pre-war  levels (Table 1).  Despite some protests, there was no shortage of home workers. Many  Dennison  workers  had  been  laid  off,  and  their  families needed the money.

Public  opinion  soon  forced  a change. Unemployment was high, and  those  who  kept  their  jobs  experienced  wage  cuts  and  shorter hours.  Nationally, many believed that working women were replacing men,  or,  because  they  received  less  pay,  depressing  wages. Home work, though only a small part of the economy, also seemed to depress wages.  Politicians called for men to work to support their families and for the women to stay home and care for their children. 54

The National  Industrial  Recovery Act, passed in early 1933, permitted boards composed of representatives  from  business, labor, and government to combine and create binding codes of fair  competition for individual industries.  These codes, usually written by trade associations, set minimum prices and other standards, and they often banned home work.  "Prohibiting home work became a way to maintain labor standards; home work bans, written into the codes for the majority of industries where the large amount of home work seriously undermined hour  and wage decrees, set  industry-specific  timetables  for  its abolition." 55 One hundred and seven industries  outlawed or closely regulated home work. 56

Henry Dennison, the company's president, ardently supported the National Industrial Recovery Act.  Believing that cooperation and regulation were necessary for businesses' survival, he supported wage and price controls, protection for labor-including the right to unionizeand  cooperation  through  trade  associations  to  prevent  "cutthroat" competition. 57 A member of the Business Advisory Council of the U.S. Department of Commerce and an active member of the Tag Industry Code Association, he vocally advocated the Code for the Tag Industry, which ended home work. 58 Beginning in July 1933, company manage-

- 53 Work Managers Report to Directors, 1 Oct. 1932, Homework File.

54 Boris, "Regulating Industrial Homework," 745.  Also Frieda Miller, "Industrial Home Work in the  United  States," International  Labor Review (1941): 1-50.

- 55 Boris, "Regulating Industrial  Homework," 747.
- 56 Skinner, "Industrial Home Work Under the NRA," 1.
- 57 McQuaid "Henry S. Dennison and the Science of Industrial Reform,"  90-91.

58 James  Dennison, Henry S.  Dennison: New  England  Industrialist who  Served America (New York, 1955).  Henry Dennison participated in all of the trade associations that involved company products.

## Industrial Home Work of the Dennison Manufacturing  Co.  1467

ment faced the prospect of having to bring all the work inside once and for all.

Massachusetts passed a new child labor law in 1933.  Whereas the old law had restricted the working hours of children between the ages of fourteen  and sixteen, the new one banned labor for children  under the age of sixteen, either at home or in an industry during school hours. Despite its home delivery system, Dennison's management feared that they might be found in violation.  They wrote to the State Department of Labor and Industries for an evaluation of their policies. 59 The State approved the company's system of monitoring tag work by the inspectors and drivers.  As one internal report noted:

.. .careful checks are being made by the outside supervisor to be sure that all state regulations and our own are being observed by outside workers.  Care is taken to be sure that no family receives more work to do than can be performed by the adults of the family.  Our plan of operation has been submitted to the  State Labor Department  and has been approved by them. 60

Despite  State  approval,  the  company's  efforts  failed  to  restrict work to adults. One women, whose recollection was typical and who started  stringing in  1929, said that when  the inspector  appeared,  the word spread through the neighborhood  and the children went out to play until the inspection was over. She remembered that her family, with six siblings, had as many as 25,000 tags in the house at a time.  A truck driver-"nicest guy in the world"-delivered  and picked up the boxes.  The large volume of tags in her house suggests how  ineffective the company's policies were at limiting work. 61

Other stories confirm this impression.  One woman, who with her mother and ten  other siblings started  stringing in  1928, said that  the truck  driver  gave them  as many tags as they asked for and  that  they earned  from  $50 to  $80  a  month  for  many years. 62 If  correct,  this amounted  to hundreds  of thousands  of tags  a month,  far  more  than adults could have done by themselves.  This woman recalled only one instance in which a family was suspended from work.

Children of all ages did these tasks until the very end.  The company's policy was clear enough, but parents did not have to follow it and the drivers and inspectors looked the other way.  When the family col-

- 60 Works Manager's Annual report to directors, 1 Oct. 1933, Homework  File.
- 61 Louise Little, telephone interview by author,  1994.

## Gloria Vollmers 1468

lected  its  pay,  the  paymaster  must  also  have  ignored  the  fact  that amounts  were  clearly  more  than  adults  could  have  earned. Other managers must have also known what was going on.  Times were hard in this small town where people knew one another, and tags helped put dinner on the table and pay the rent.  As another interviewee said of stringing in the 1930s:

I didn't mind it and might even go so far as to say I enjoyed it.  Guess I must have been only 7 or 8 years old at the time when mom and five of us sat around the dining room table stringing box after box of tags.  Money was hard to come by in the early 1930s and we all had to pitch in to make ends meet.  There was never a question about whether we liked or didn't like doing it.  When  mom brought out that box of tags each evening after  supper, we took our places and did our thing for a couple of hours till bedtime at 9:00. Counting tags was better than counting sheep! 63

## The End of Home Work

Anticipating  that  the  Tag  Association's  ban  on  home  work  would become effective  sometime in 1934, the tag divisions manager, under the direction of Thomas Portmore, tried to prepare the company.  His efforts  mirrored those tried ten years earlier.  He estimated that of the million  tags  then  being  strung  outside  every day, machines  could do 10%.  The remainder would require  100 full-time  hand stringers.  He worried that the home workers would refuse  to enter the factory and asked the  inspector to  survey them. The company offered  each one full-time  employment  at  an  anticipated  rate  of 30 cents  an hour,  far more than the current  piece  rate. 64 The manager of the tag division assigned  one  engineer  to  design  a  machine  to  accommodate  more lengths  of string and  more tag sizes and ordered  the oldest  stringing machine to be pulled out of storage, overhauled, and put to work.  The research department began designing a new type of wired shipping tag to replace the current one, which machines could not string and which took two hours per thousand by hand.  The firm  ordered  salesmen to steer  customers  toward  machine-strung  tags. For  the  first  time, Portmore began to plan where the new stringers might be accommodated in the  factory. 65

## Industrial Home Work of the Dennison Manufacturing  Co.  1469

Attracting employees proved easy.  The promised rate, of 33 cents per hour, 66 plus the certainty that home work would disappear, provided considerable incentive, particularly when coupled with the reality of the Depression.  In October 1933, the division manager created a work area  for  the 100  new  employees. The  company  moved  obsolete machinery, and the mechanical division began to work on lighting, to locate furniture,  and to design the layout. 67 By the end of November 1933, facilities  were  nearly  complete. The  new shipping  tag, which machines could string, was submitted to the Merchandising Committee for marketing. 68 After a series of extensions, the final deadline for ending home work was set for 1 January 1935. 69 At that time the company brought all its work inside the factory.

The  last  reference  to  home  work  at  Dennison  appeared  in  the Personnel Annual Report of 1935.  "We were able to get a good many people who were trained for this class of work, but we also found  that in  spite  of  our  attempts  to  keep  it  away from  children,  much  of  the work had been done by them," the report concluded.  When the company asked women in the factory why their production was lower than at home, some admitted that their children had been helping them. 70

## Conclusion

Industrial home work had a long history at Dennison  Manufacturing. Late in the  19th century it constituted  100% of the  stringing  operations, but it began to decline as economically efficient  machines were developed, until by 1928 it accounted for about 20% of all strung tags. Although  the  company  responded  to  media  reports  of  the  abuse  of child labor, it was apparently not a serious concern before 1912. At this time, fourteen  to sixteen year olds were eligible for full-time  employment, although  Massachusetts law did restrict  them  to eight hours a day and banned night work.

The  works  manager,  Thomas  Portmore,  repeatedly  expressed  a desire to bring the work inside to insure greater control. Despite its

## Gloria Vollmers 1470

simplicity,  however,  the  costs  of  change  long  outweighed  the  advantages of supervision.  Though control would have ensured quality and timed production-both  of which were recurrent problems according to  inspectors'  reports-it  would  also involve  supervision,  the  cost of space, electricity, heat, furniture,  and possibly require the payment of higher  rates  than  the  home  workers  received. Portmore  apparently failed to convince other managers that ending home work would pay.

Many home workers testified  that they could take as many tags as they wanted in the  1930s, which suggests that the community undermined the company's policy to limit work to adults.  Though  delivery personnel deserve much of the blame for the wide use of child labor, other managers must have been aware of it.  Families saw little harm in  having  children  work,  which  contemporary  economic  conditions encouraged. Certainly inspectors  stepped in only when home conditions were incontrovertibly bad.

The company treated workers fairly liberally.  More often than not, it resolved worker's complaints in their favor.  Inspectors' reports show that when a home did not meet company standards for cleanliness, the inspector herself would repeatedly visit to help the family  rectify  the situation.  Families which stopped working could start again later without penalty.

Nor do workers seem to have suffered  from  their labor.  Though some of those interviewed  said they hated  stringing, they also volunteered  that  the work was not  difficult  and  that  their  families  needed the money.  Many said they loved it, that it brought families, neighbors and  friends  together. There  is  little  evidence  that  child  labor  in Framingham  created  large  problems. Whether  because  of  luck  or safeguards, abuse seems to have been rare.

Despite indications that Dennison was trying to end home work, it probably would not have done so but for the  Depression-era politics. Some  companies  then  (as  today)  made  money  on  home  work  and found willing employees.  Yet concern about employing men in the factories led to its elimination  in the tag business. The assumption that homework displaced men was probably in error, however.  Home work did  not  undermine  male  jobs  because  it  was  "women's  work." At Dennison, men never strung tags inside the factory-they did not even run the stringing machines.