This article was downloaded by: [New York University]

On: 03 October 2014, At: 23:02

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Scandinavian Economic History Review

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:

http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/sehr20

## Is Structural Change Speeding Up? The Case of Sweden, 1850-2000

Lars Fredrik Andersson &amp; Magnus Lindmark Published online: 26 Nov 2008.

To cite this article: Lars Fredrik Andersson &amp; Magnus Lindmark (2008) Is Structural Change Speeding Up? The Case of Sweden, 1850-2000, Scandinavian Economic History Review, 56:3, 192-208, DOI: 10.1080/03585520802456941

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03585520802456941

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

## Is Structural Change Speeding Up? The Case of Sweden, 1850 2000 /C1

## ABSTRACT

This article focuses on the importance of structural change on productivity growth and conditions in the labour market. From a productivity perspective, a positive relation is found between structural change and productivity growth from the industrial breakthrough until the first oil crisis. From the early 1970s, this positive relation weakened and eventually became negative as labour moved from high to low productive industries. From a labour market perspective, it is found that extent of sectoral reallocation of labour has become more intense over the twentieth century. The extent of job gains and losses seems to have been more intense during the postwar period than during the industrialization phase.

Key words: Structural change; productivity; labour market; economic growth; job gains

## Introduction

This article focuses on the importance of structural change for productivity growth and for conditions in the labour market in the Swedish economy during the period 1850 /C1 2000. By employing methods used in contemporary economics in conjunction with recently revisited and detailed Swedish historical national account (HNA) data, we contribute to the economic history literature with an analysis of factors fostering long-term productivity growth. From a labour market perspective, this article focuses on different modes of labour reallocation. By meansofdecomposingemploymentgrowthbyjobgainsinexpandingindustries and job losses from contracting industries, we provide new perspectives and analyses of how certain aspects of structural change may have altered in a long-term perspective. The article also contributes with analyses of the interdependence between employment growth, demographic changes and labour reallocation.

The article is organized as follows. In the next section, previous studies focusing on the impact of structural change are outlined and employed to address questions pertaining to the relation between productivity growth and structural change. Then, method and data are outlined. In the forth, fifth and sixth sections, we present the impact of structural change on labour productivity growth and reallocation of labour. The final section provides a conclusion.

## Structural Change and ProductivityGrowth

Structural change is a broad concept, which is reflected in the multitude of conceptual, theoretical and empirical approaches taken. On the one hand, we distinguish between long- and short-term analyses of structural change, and notice that the importance of structural change seems to be related to the time frames used. On the other hand, we also distinguish between analyses of structural change founded in traditional economic theory and analyses based on other frameworks, such as Schumpeterian theory. Even here, it seems that the importance of structural change depends on the chosen framework.

One important field in productivity research concerns long-term patterns and growth impacts of structural change. Temin has, for instance, argued that the share of agricultural employment in the interwar period had a significant impact on European countries' postwar economic growth, showing a positive relationship between interwar agricultural employment shares and postwar economic growth. 1 Broadberry and Irwin have shown that aggregated productivity differences between the British and American economies in the nineteenth century may be explained by a larger share of agricultural employment in the United States, which concealed the fact the American manufacturing industries had higher productivity levels than their counterparts in the United Kingdom. 2 Accordingly, both these studies point to the importance of structural change. This contrasts with more contemporarily oriented productivity studies. Baumol's hypothesis of unbalanced growth and the predicted slow-down of aggregated productivity growth due to reallocation of labour to service industries has led to various studies of productivity leading sectors. 3 However, studies such as Fagerberg and Timmer and Szirmai, using a comparatively short-time perspective, conclude that structural change has a rather weak impact on the aggregate labour productivity growth. 4 Studies exploring, for instance, information and communication technology as promoting productivity growth in service industries are also worth mentioning. 5

The importance of long-term structural change has also been advocated by Scho n. He interprets nineteenth- and twentieth-century economic change as a sequence of long-swings of structural change, which ultimately are driven by

- 1 Temin, P., The Golden Age of European Growth Reconsidered, European Review of Economic History , vol. 6, 2002: 3 /C1 22.
- 2 Broadberry, S. and Irwin, D., Labor Productivity in the United States and the United Kingdom during the Nineteenth Century, Explorations in Economic History , vol. 43, 2006: 257 /C1 279.
- 3 See Baumol W. J., Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crises, American Economic Review , vol. 57, 1967: 415 /C1 426; Harberger, A. C., A Vision of the Growth Process, American Economic Review , 88, 1998: 1 /C1 23.
- 4 Fagerberg J., Technological Progress, Structural Change and Productivity Growth: A Comparative Study, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics , vol. 11, 2000: 393 /C1 411; Timmer, M. P. and Szirmai, A., Productivity Growth in Asian Manufacturing, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics , vol. 11, 2000: 371 /C1 392.
- 5 See, e.g., Brynjolfsen, E. and Lorin, M. H., Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation and Business Perspectives, Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 14, 2000: 23 /C1 48.

the interplay between the life-cycles of General Purpose Technologies and institutions. 6 Here, structural change is a notion in an interpretative framework influenced by scholars like Schumpeter and Dahme 'n, and is not limited to the more strictly defined concept of 'neo-classical economics'. In Schon's frame-work, structural change has ramifications beyond productivity growth and, as such, is an integrated aspect of socio-economic change, broadly speaking.

Since the literature demonstrates contradictory results, the importance (or lack of importance) of structural change for promoting long-run productivity growth remains unclear. Our first question is therefore: how important has structural change been for aggregated productivity growth? Following Temin, it seems to be more important to move labour from agriculture to industry than from industry to services. 7 If Temin is right, it raises the question as to whether the contribution of structural change is similar over time.

We also appreciate scholars like Scho n, who stress that structural change is not only relevant for productivity growth. Indeed, literature on recent employment trends has addressed the issue of whether rapid structural change may help to explain the stalled growth of employment. 8 This literature suggests that the rapid structural change of today has greatly increased the number of workers forced to make major career transitions. Since securing a job in a different industry often takes time and may result in a lower wage, structural change may hamper employment growth.

Key issues addressed in productivity research are the increased importance of unexplained elements by factor inputs as well as the rising importance of intangible capital formation. 9 Human capital formation is usually measured as investments in education and research and has been used to better account for the unexplained elements by factor inputs. In this article, we argue that human capital, augmented by skills earned through on-the-job-training and learningby-doing, depends on whether employment growth in expanding industries is primarily accomplished through general employment growth or through reallocation of labour from contracting industries. Conditions in the labour market are therefore affected by the speed at which workers are forced to secure a job in a different industry. Given the strong impact of structural change on the labour market and the growth process, it is surprising that previous studies have not shown whether reallocation of labour is greater today than previously. 10 Our second question is therefore: is the extent of sectoral reallocation of labour larger today than previously?

- 6 Scho n, L., Electricity, Technological Change and Productivity in Swedish Industry, 1890 1990, /C1 European Review of Economic History , vol. 4, 2000: 175 /C1 194.
- 7 Temin, Golden Age of European Growth, 3 /C1 22.
- 8 Groshen, E. L. and Potter, S., Has Structural Change Contributed to a Jobless Recovery? Current Issues in Economics and Finance , vol. 9, 2003: 1 /C1 7; Aaronson, D., Rissman, E. R. and Sullivan, D. G., Can Sectoral Reallocation Explain the Jobless Recovery? Economic Perspectives , vol. 2, 2004: 36 49; /C1 Jacobson, L., LaLonde, R. and Sullivan, D., Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers, American Economic Review , vol. 83, 1993: 685 /C1 709.
- 9 Abramamovitz, D. American macroeconomic growth in the era of knowledge based progress: The long-run perspective, in The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, Vol. 2 , Eds S. Engerman and R. Gallman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
- 10 Aaronson et al., Sectoral Reallocation; Jacobson et al., Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers.

In order to quantify the extent of the sectoral reallocation of labour over time, we measure the two different modes by which shifting labour shares may arise. As previously mentioned, sectoral reallocation of labour may result from transfers of labour from one industry to another, or as an effect of a growing labour force. The first mode implies that it is likely that a person needs to make a major career transition from one contracting industry to an expanding one, while the second mode implies that a person entering the labour market finds employment in an expanding industry. In this study we therefore decompose the contribution of employment to labour expanding industries from: first, reallocation from contracting industries and, second, total labour force growth. On basis of the assumption of on-the-job-training-augmented human capital, we will in the closing section argue that the relative importance of these two modes of sectoral reallocation of labour has changed over time, and that the challenges facing regulators and actors on the labour market are different now compared to historical experiences.

## Method and Data

In order to assess the productivity growth due to shifts of labour between industries, we use a shift-share decomposition method. The method allows us to decompose the effect of labour shifting to industries with a higher level of productivity as well as industries with a higher productivity growth rate. The remaining productivity increase, the within-effect, is due to changes in capital intensity, technology and unobserved shift-effects between firms.

The shift-share method provides a tool to account for how the aggregate productivity growth is mechanically linked to different industries' productivity growth as well as the reallocation of labour between industries. In accordance, the method relates directly to the two contrasting mechanism previous denoted structural burden or bonus to the aggregate productivity growth. Following the methodology suggested by Fagerberg and Pender, we decompose the aggregate productivity growth into three separate effects: 11

$$( 1 ) Growth LPT ( ) /C30 LPT t ; /C28 1 LPT t ; /C28 1 /C30$$

$$X fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl ffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl ffl{ n i /C30 1 ( LPi t1 ; /C28 LPi t ; /C28 1 ) Si t ; /C28 1 zffl ( 1 ) within shift effect /C27 X fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{ n i /C30 1 LPi t ; /C28 1 ( Si t ; /C28 1 /C28 Si t ; /C28 1 ) zffl ( 2 ) Static shift effect /C27 X fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl}|fflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflfflffl{ n i /C30 1 ( LPi t1 ; /C28 LPi t ; /C28 1 )( Si t ; /C28 1 /C28 Si t ; /C28 1 ) zffl ( 3 ) Dynamic shift effect LPTt ; /C28 1$$

where LP is labour productivity; t /C1 1, base year; t final year; T, S over industries I; Si share of industry I in total employment. The first component (1), the within effect, captures the change in labour productivity, under the constraint that no structural shifts have taken place and that each industry has maintained the share amount of shares in total employment as in the base year. The second

component (2), the static shift effect, is calculated as the sum of relative changes of labour across industries between t /C1 1 and t, weighted by the initial value of labour productivity in t /C1 1. The third component (3), dynamic shift effect, is calculated as the sum of changes in labour shares and labour productivity of industries.

The static effect can be employed as an indication of the presence of structural bonus. If industries with high levels of productivity attract more labour and increase their share of total labour, than a structural bonus is indicated. To account for this effect, the following condition is applied:

$$( 2 ) X n i /C30 1 LPi t ; /C28 1 ( Si t1 ; /C28 Si t ; /C28 1 ) /C21 0$$

In turn, the dynamic shift effect could be employed as an indication of the presence of structural burden. If an industry with fast growing labour productivity reduces their labour shares, than a structural burden is indicated. To account for the Baumol's hypothesis of structural burden, the following condition is applied:

$$( 3 ) X n i /C30 1 ( LPi t1 ; /C28 LPi t ; /C28 1 )( Si t1 ; /C28 Si t ; /C28 1 ) /C21 0$$

The presence of structural bonus and burden has been reported in previous studies. For instance, Peneder observes a robust structural burden due to the fact that industries with the most rapid productivity growth cannot keep pace with the speed of labour shedding. 12 However, consistent with findings of Fagerberg and Timmer and Szirmai, on average, structural change has a rather weak impact on the aggregate labour productivity growth as the within effect accounts for most of the growth in total productivity growth. 13

Since productivity growth is the output change in relation to labour input change rising productivity results from various combinations of output growth and decrease of labour. From a strict productivity perspective it is not necessary to consider whether labour productivity is due to increases in output or decreases in labour inputs. If, however, the productivity perspective is coupled with a perspective recognizing institutional and political issues pertaining to the labour market, it is important to consider how productivity growth is achieved. We therefore introduce the following concept of value adding, which is the part of labour productivity change (assuming positively productivity growth) due to increased output (the positive ^ VA in industry i). Subsequently, we also introduce the concept of labour saving, which is the part of labour productivity growth (assuming positively productivity growth) due to decreased employment (the negative ^ L in industry i). In an industry dominated by labour saving (more than half of the labour productivity growth emanating from labour saving), employment is expected to decline in absolute numbers.

- 12 Pender, Industrial Structure and Aggregate Growth, 427 /C1 448.
- 13 Fagerberg, Technological Progress; Timmer and Szirmai, Productivity Growth.

In order to explore how employment growth is linked to job destruction and creation, the aggregated employment growth (LFT) is decomposed into net job gains in expanding industries (EI) and net job losses in contracting industries ( ^ CI) as follows:

$$X n X n$$

$$( 4 ) D LFT /C30 i /C30 1 D EIi /C28 i /C30 1 j D CIi j If D CIi B 0 If D ET /C21 0 Assume D E /C30 E 1 /C28 E 0 ; D LF /C30 LF 1 /C28 LF 0 ; etc :$$

where expanding industries is restricted to industries where the number of jobs are increasing and contracting industries is limited to the industries where jobs are lost between base year 0 and final year 1. To capture how job creation and destruction evolves over time, the components EI and CI are normalized with aggregated employment growth between base and final year as well as with the stock of employed in the base year. The main advantage is that the measure can be used to approximate labour reallocation using time series employment data. It is, however, only a crude indicator for the extent of generational labour mobility versus sectoral reallocation.

To measure the extent of sectoral reallocation, the aggregated employment growth (LFT) is decomposed into entry (ENi) and exit (EXi) of labour as follows:

$$X X$$

$$( 5 ) D LFT /C30 n i /C30 1 D ENi /C28 n i /C30 1 j D EXi j If D EXi B 0 If D ENT /C21 0 Assume D LF /C30 LF 1 /C28 LF 0 ; D EX /C30 EX 1 /C28 EX 0 ; etc :$$

where EN and EX is decomposed in the following components:

$$( 6 ) P n D ENi /C30 P n D J /C27 P n D R /C27 P n D OE$$

$$i /C30 1 i /C30 1 i /C30 1 i /C30 1 X n i /C30 1 D EXi /C30 X n i /C30 1 D E /C27 X n i /C30 1 D R /C27 X n i /C30 1 D OR Assume D J /C30 J 1 /C28 J 0 ; D R /C30 R 1 /C28 R 0 ; etc$$

For each sector (i), the following condition applies. The component J denotes the number of juveniles entering the employment stock and born in the period t 1 /C1 16 to t1 /C1 15 n, where n is the number of years in the period of study. The /C1 component R denotes the number of employed reallocated between industries during the period of study. R is measured as individuals employed in t1and born in the period t1 /C1 16-n to t1 /C1 64 minus the individuals employed in t0 and born in the period t0 /C1 16 to t0 /C1 64 /C27 n. The component OE denotes the number

of individuals born in t0 /C1 16 to t1 /C1 64 entering the employment stock. OE is measured as ^ LF /C1 (J-E) given that OE /C21 0. The component E denotes the number of seniors born in to /C1 65 to t0 /C1 65 /C27 n exiting the employment stock. The component OR denotes the number of individuals born in t0 /C1 16 to t1 /C1 64 exiting the employment stock. OR is measured as ^ LF /C1 (J-E) given that OR B 0. The employment stock is limited to the age range 16 /C1 64.

The decomposition of labour productivity growth and employment growth is based on data from Krantz and Scho n. 14 In addition, demographic data from Swedish Official Statistics is utilized to divide the sectoral employment data (from Krantz and Scho n) into age cohorts for the years 1910, 1930, 1945, 1965 and 1990. 15 We notice that the level of aggregation is comparatively high and that shift-effects may be different if another level of aggregation was used. However, when a more detailed level of aggregation was evaluated through using the nine sub-sector division of manufacturing industry in HNA, we did not find major differences. We also rejected using detailed data on sub-periods (in practice, National Accounts data from 1960), since these results would not be comparable with results for previous periods.

Structural change usually involves gradually going reallocation processes. This poses certain measurement problems. Using annual changes on raw data will frequently produce excessive fluctuations related to short-term economic phenomena. This effectively obscures any long-term trends since they only constitute a small proportion of the annual change. Smoothing of such a series will therefore not say much about the long-term trend. Time series decomposition, by, for instance, the use of Kalman filters, is therefore important in measurements of structural change. 16 In this article we use a Kernel smoother for all output and labour data in order to arrive at measures of long-term changes.

## The Industrialization Phase, 1850 1913 /C1

The Swedish economy underwent significant changes from the mid-nineteenth century, which paved the way for the industrialization of the country during the 1890s. Despite some disagreement on the exact chronology, most scholars would agree that a first wave of industrialization occurred during the 1870s, which in turn was preceded by the growth of a limited number of industries already from the 1840s. Despite slight disagreements on details, it is undisputed that the transition into an era of modern economic growth took place during the period 1850 /C1 1913.

The Krantz and Scho n HNA data shows that the transition into a modern phase of economic growth was driven by productivity growth. The GDP growth

rate averaged at 2.6 per cent, of which the major share (assuming GDP growth 100 per cent) was productivity growth (70 per cent), while employment growth accounted for 30 per cent. The productivity growth was in turn mainly driven by within-effects, which fluctuated in response to international conjunctures. Especially the Great Depression and the shorter 1905 crises are clearly distinguishable in the series. A couple of shorter periods; 1854 1858 and /C1 1867 1873 mark the first bursts of productivity /C1 growth that was driven by within-effects.

Figure 1 shows that static shift-effects were positive throughout the period, but considerably smaller than the within-effects. Shift-effects, measured as the share of total productivity growth (100 per cent) fluctuated on average in the range of 15 /C1 20 per cent during the period. In contrast to this, dynamic shifteffects are hardly discernable and fluctuate around zero. In the following we will therefore disregard dynamic shift-effects in the analysis.

At the same time it is worth paying attention to changes that are obscured in the aggregates shown in Figure 1. The contribution by industries to total productivity growth shows, for instance, that it was agriculture, and not manufacturing industry, that was the most important industry in terms of contributions to total productivity growth until outset of the long depression. An implication of this is that fluctuations in productivity growth during the first 25 years of the subperiod mainly reflect agricultural conjunctures. The Swedish productivity growth until the long depression was therefore almost entirely related to productivity changes within agriculture, and has accordingly little to do with changes in other industries. Even though the 1840s saw the first developments of, for instance, saw mills, industrialized timber exports and textile industries, it is clear that manufacturing industry were too small in terms of employment to exercise any significant influence on aggregated labour productivity.

If industrialization is defined as the point in time when manufacturing industry commences sustained productivity leadership with respect to contributions to aggregated productivity, this occurred only after the long depression. It is also evident that the rise of manufacturing industry to productivity leadership was a prolonged process. Throughout the long depression

Figure 1 Decomposition of productivity growth by within, static and dynamic effects, 1850 /C1 1913. Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

<!-- image -->

the contributions of both agriculture and manufacturing industry were approximately equivalent in magnitude, and manufacturing industry could surpass agriculture only in the early 1890s. As seen in Figure 2, not only manufacturing, but also services, became the main contributors to the growth of aggregated productivity during the 1890s and early twenty century.

A common theme in lectures on industrialization is the transfer of labour from low-productivity agriculture to high-productivity manufacturing industry. Such a transfer of labour should not, however, be exaggerated. Seen from the perspective of net job gains and losses, one can note that all industries experienced job gains (i.e., employment increased in all industries). This expansion can be attributed to a combination of growth in employment rates and in the economically active population. 17

The shifts in employment shares across industries were mainly caused by lower employment growth rates in agriculture as compared to manufacturing industry. Only from the mid-1870s was a phenomenon of job losses in agriculture. Even though job losses in contracting industries and job gains in expanding ones become a part of story from the 1880s, shifts in employment shares were an important feature of the Swedish industrialization.

As seen in Table 1, job losses pertaining to the agricultural sector only account for roughly 1 per cent of the aggregated employment growth during the period 1850 1880. /C1 Indeed, the job destruction was less significant in the yearly industrialization period. The fact that the population growth was high, despite the number of people who immigrated to the United States, resulted in comparatively high employment growth. During the period 1880 1913, /C1 employment growth was lower, while the extent of job gain and losses increased.

Turning to the sub-period 1890 /C1 1913, Figure 1 shows that the within-effects were approximately of the same magnitude as the peaks of the 1850s and early

Figure 2 Contribution to aggregated productivity growth by main industries,

1850 1913. /C1

Note: Services include: (I) Building and Construction, (II) Transport and Communications, (III) Private Services, (IV) Public Services. Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

17 In this article, 'economically active population' is defined as persons aged 15 /C1 60, and 'employment rate' is defined as employed persons as a share of the economically active population. Calculations are based on Krantz and Scho n ( Swedish Historical National Accounts ) and Swedish Official Statistics, population.

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Decomposition of employment growth by job gains in expanding industries and job losses in contracting industries, 1850 /C1 1913.

|                        | 1850 1880 /C1   | 1850 1880 /C1                  | 1850 1880 /C1               | 1880 1913 /C1   | 1880 1913 /C1                  | 1880 1913 /C1               |
|------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                        | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) |
| Contracting industries | 250             | 1                              | 0.0                         | 3,787           | 30                             | 0.2                         |
| Expanding industries   | 16,924          | 101                            | 1.1                         | 16,303          | 130                            | 0.8                         |
| Employment growth      | 16,674          | 100                            | 1.1                         | 12,516          | 100                            | 0.6                         |

Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

1870s. With manufacturing industry as the productivity leader, the withineffects were now sustained over a considerably longer period. This not only applied to within-effects, but also to total labour productivity growth, which from 1890s was higher in manufacturing industry than in agriculture. Absolute transfers of labour seem to have grown in importance. As seen in Table 1, the losses of jobs in agriculture in this case and the gains of jobs in manufacturing may have been attributed to a more intense sectoral reallocation of labour between 1880 and 1913 compared to the period 1850 /C1 1880.

## The World Wars and the Interwar Period, 1914 1945 /C1

The disintegration of the world economy and the strong fluctuations following the First World War had strong effects on the Swedish economy. In particular, the downturn in foreign trade, monetary volatility and world economy instability resulted in weak economic performance. The development in aggregated labour productivity was in general characterized by slower growth and more volatile trends. Labour productivity growth was especially poor during the period 1914 /C1 1921, the Depression (1930 /C1 1933) and during the Second World War (1939 1945). /C1

In Figure 3 we see that this weak performance is mainly explained by the slow productivity growth within industries (within-effect), while we also find that the shift-effects became relatively important during the period. The shift-effects were of the same magnitude as they had been historically, but became stronger than during previous periods seen in relation to the within-effects.

In Figure 4, the within-effect is distributed by main industries during the period 1913 1945. /C1 As seen in the figure, the slow development in the agriculture industry implied a weak impact on the aggregated within-effect for most of the period. Positive effects are seen throughout most of the 1920s, while negative signs are dominating the 1930s. Still, the agriculture sector contributed less than 1 per cent to the aggregated figure. The growth in within-effect therefore mainly emanated from the manufacturing industry. After the downturn of the First World War and its aftermath, manufacturing industry started to contribute with some 1 /C1 2 per cent and, after the setback between 1928 and 1930, the contribution went up to 1 /C1 3 percent. The service industry followed

Figure 3 Decomposition of productivity growth by within, static and dynamic

Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish

effects, 1914 /C1 1945. Historical National Accounts .

<!-- image -->

the developments in the manufacturing industry, but contributed with a less significant share of the aggregated within-effect over the period 1913 /C1 1945.

Following the growth of labour productivity, we find that agriculture was not lagging too far behind manufacturing industry during the 1920s. Due to the growth of output, value adding was also an important source of the productivity growth in the 1920s. After the Depression, however, labour productivity experienced a marked decline in agriculture, while it continued to grow in the manufacturing industry. Unlike in manufacturing industry, labour saving was fostering productivity growth in the agriculture sector. However, with the decline in value adding during the 1930s, labour saving alone could not keep up the productivity growth.

The number of people active in agriculture was reduced by 260,000 people during the period 1914 1945. /C1 Within the same period, employment in manufacturing industry increased by roughly 430,000 people, while employment in the other industries expanded by some 600,000 people. These changes in employment structure indeed had important consequences for productivity growth, especially due to increased employment in manufacturing industry.

Figure 4 Contribution to aggregated productivity growth by main industries, 1913 1945. /C1 Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

<!-- image -->

Table 2 shows a decomposition of employment growth by job gains and job losses during the period 1913 1945. /C1 From 1913 to 1930, job losses in contracting industries equalled 3,851 per year, while job gains reached 36,644. Taken together, job creation and job destruction resulted in an employment growth of 32,792 per year. Job losses measured 12 per cent of employment growth and job gains 112 per cent. Normalizing with the stock employed in base year (1913) gives an aggregated employment growth of 1.4 per cent and job loss and gains of 0.2 and 1.6, respectively. However, the process of job destruction and creation underwent significant changes during the interwar period. As shown in Table 2, the extent of job losses increased rapidly in the period 1930 /C1 1945 as compared to the previous period. Per year, the number of job losses reached 14,758, job gains 33,495, making an employment growth of 18,737 individuals per year during the period 1930 /C1 1945.

Normalised by the stock employed, we find that the growth rate reached 0.6 per cent in terms of job losses and 1.2 per cent in terms of job gains. As far as job creation and destruction, given a proxy of employment reallocation, one could argue that sectoral reallocation of employment was higher during the period 1930 /C1 1945 compared to the pervious periods (1850 /C1 1880, 1880 /C1 1913 and 1913 1930). /C1

In Table 3 employment growth is decomposed into entry and exit during the period 1910 /C1 1945. Entry is the sum of: juveniles entering the labour market; employed individuals entering from other sectors (reallocation of employed); and other individuals entering the labour market during the period of study. Exit is the sum of: seniors exiting the labour market; exit to other sectors (reallocation of employed); and other individuals exiting the labour market during the period of study (see Equations 5 and 6). During the period 1910 /C1 1930, the entry of juveniles totalled 70,629 individuals, while 3,875 individuals entered/exited from/to other sectors. During the same period, 31,026 seniors and 9,546 others left the labour market. The sectoral reallocation of employed was relatively modest compared to the period 1930 /C1 1945. During the latter period, employment growth decreased as the number of juveniles entering the labour market declined, while the number of seniors and others leaving the labour market increased. The weaker employment growth was in conjunction with increased sectoral reallocation of employed, as well as

Table 2 Decomposition of employment growth by job gains in expanding industries and job losses in contracting industries, 1913 /C1 1945.

|                        | 1913 1930 /C1   | 1913 1930 /C1                  | 1913 1930 /C1               | 1930 1945 /C1   | 1930 1945 /C1                  | 1930 1945 /C1               |
|------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                        | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) |
| Contracting industries | 3,851           | 12                             | 0.2                         | 14,758          | 79                             | 0.5                         |
| Expanding industries   | 36,644          | 112                            | 1.6                         | 33,495          | 179                            | 1.2                         |
| Employment growth      | 32,792          | 100                            | 1.4                         | 18,737          | 100                            | 0.7                         |

Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

Table 3 Decomposition of employment growth by entry and exit, 1910 /C1 1945.

|                   | 1910 1930 /C1   | 1910 1930 /C1                  | 1910 1930 /C1               | 1930 1945 /C1   | 1930 1945 /C1                  | 1930 1945 /C1               |
|-------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                   | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) |
| Entry             | 74,504          | 248                            | 3.51                        | 76,653          | 409                            | 2.82                        |
| Juveniles         | 70,629          | 235                            | 3.33                        | 67,114          | 358                            | 2.46                        |
| Reallocation      | 3,875           | 13                             | 0.18                        | 9,539           | 51                             | 0.35                        |
| Others entering   | 0               | 0                              | 0.00                        | 0               | 0                              | 0.00                        |
| Exit              | 44,447          | 148                            | 2.10                        | 57,916          | 309                            | 2.13                        |
| Seniors           | 31,026          | 103                            | 1.46                        | 33,554          | 179                            | 1.23                        |
| Reallocation      | 3,875           | 13                             | 0.18                        | 9,539           | 51                             | 0.35                        |
| Others exiting    | 9,546           | 32                             | 0.45                        | 14,823          | 79                             | 0.54                        |
| Employment growth | 30,057          | 100                            | 1.42                        | 18,737          | 100                            | 0.69                        |

Sources: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts ; Sveriges Officiella statistik (Official Statistics of Sweden); Folkrakningen (population census) 1910, 1930, 1945; Folk och bostadsra kningen (population and housing census) 1965 and 1990.

increased job losses as indicated in Table 2. However, the number of job losses exceeded the number of individuals reallocated between sectors.

## The Postwar Period, 1950 2000 /C1

The postwar period saw the highest labour productivity growth rates ever recorded in Sweden. As seen in Figure 5, the within-effects marked an all time high during a comparatively short period between 1950 and 1966, followed by a dramatic downturn to levels comparable to the nineteenth century. Not surprisingly, manufacturing industry accounted for the largest contribution to overall productivity growth, dwarfing all other industries.

The period also reveals other dramatic changes. The static shift-effects were positive during the 1950s, but declined rapidly to historically very small levels. Already in 1962 these small shift-effects were reversed to sustained negative contributions to aggregated productivity growth. Apart from occasional downturns during recessions, this had no historical counterpart. The most distinctive events during the period /C1 the drastic reduction of within-effects from 1967 and the appearance of negative shift-effects /C1 are in turn related to how labour productivity was achieved in the manufacturing industry. This is perhaps even more clearly illustrated through agriculture, for which negative but much smaller shifts effects have been evident since the nineteenth century.

Wehave previously shown how employment in agriculture started to decrease in the 1880s. This tendency accelerated during the interwar period and became even more marked during the postwar period. Such a decrease in employment may lead to positive shift-effects, but only if agricultural labour productivity levels are lower than the total economy average. In the case of agriculture, negative shift-effects show that even though labour productivity was lower than manufacturing industry, it was higher than average productivity (Figure 6). The agricultural industry had the third highest labour

Figure 5 Decomposition of productivity growth by within, static and dynamic

Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish

effects, 1950 /C1 2000. Historical National Accounts .

<!-- image -->

productivity growth rates during the whole period investigated (i.e., 1850 /C1 2000). However, since labour productivity in agriculture foremost was generated through labour saving rather than value adding, shift-share analysis reports a negative contribution to overall productivity. Accordingly, with lower shares of employment, the contributions to total within-effects are also reduced.

The employment structure changed in several key respects during the period 1945 1965. Employment in agriculture decreased rapidly (394,000 persons), /C1 while employment increased in all other industries. The number employed increased by 163,000 in manufacturing, although employment culminated already in 1960. In private and public services, the number of employed increased by 199,000 and 252,000 persons, respectively.

From the early 1960s, labour saving appears for the first time in manufacturing industry. This also explains the negative shift-effects. Employment in manufacturing industry fell by 349,000 persons during the period 1965 /C1 2000. This can be compared to agriculture, in which employment fell by 233,000

Figure 6 Contribution to aggregated productivity growth by main industries,

Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish

1950 2000. /C1 Historical National Accounts .

<!-- image -->

persons during the same period. At the same time, employment increased, with 855,000 persons in other industries. Of these, almost 492,000 persons found employment in public services and 353,000 in private services. An historical difference was that employment now increased in sectors with less strong labour productivity development. Along with job destruction in high productivity sectors and job creation in low productivity sectors come negative shifteffects, as seen in Figure 5.

Table 4 shows the contribution of job losses in contracting sectors and job gains in expanding sectors to the aggregated employment growth during the period 1965 /C1 2000. Employment growth stagnated significantly during the later part of the twentieth century. Job losses in contracting industries was historically high in both periods (1945 1965 /C1 and 1965 2000), /C1 while job gains in expanding industries declined during the latter period.

Table 5 shows the contribution of entry and exit to employment growth during the period 1945 1990. /C1 In the period 1945 1965, /C1 the number of juveniles entering the labour market exceeds the number of seniors exiting. The same holds also for other groups entering /C1 particularly women and labour immigration. The measure of sectoral reallocation shows that the magnitude of labour movement increases over time. Normalised by the stock employed, sectoral reallocation is higher compared to previous periods reported in Table 3.

If structural change is indicated by job destruction and reallocation of employment over time, we find that the extent of structural change is not constant over time. Job losses are a phenomenon that arises during the industrialization phase, while the extent of job losses is the most intense during the postwar period. This phenomenon peaks in 1970 and falls more rapidly during the post-1990 period. An additional measure of structural changes reallocation of employment across sectors (generational mobility excluded) (Figure 7). This measure gives a similar picture of the twentieth century. Sectoral reallocation was less intense in the period 1910 1930 than latter /C1 periods. Sectoral reallocation increases in conjunction with the growth in job losses during the late 1930s and 1940s. Sectoral reallocation is the most intense during the postwar period.

Table 4 Decomposition of employment growth by job gains in expanding industries and job losses in contracting industries, 1945 /C1 2000.

|                        | 1945 1965 /C1   | 1945 1965 /C1                  | 1945 1965 /C1               | 1965 2000 /C1   | 1965 2000 /C1                  | 1965 2000 /C1               |
|------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                        | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) |
| Contracting industries | 19,697          | 103                            | 0.7                         | 20,118          | 389                            | 0.59                        |
| Expanding industries   | 38,755          | 203                            | 1.3                         | 25,291          | 489                            | 0.75                        |
| Employment growth      | 19,059          | 100                            | 0.6                         | 5,173           | 100                            | 0.15                        |

Source: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

Table 5 Decomposition of employment growth by entry and exit of labour, 1945 1990. /C1

|                   | 1945 1965 /C1   | 1945 1965 /C1                  | 1945 1965 /C1               | 1965 1990 /C1   | 1965 1990 /C1                  | 1965 1990 /C1               |
|-------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                   | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) | Number per year | Share of employment growth (%) | Share of stock employed (%) |
| Entry             | 80,070          | 420                            | 2.67                        | 93,695          | 683                            | 2.77                        |
| Juveniles         | 66,924          | 351                            | 2.23                        | 76,972          | 561                            | 2.27                        |
| Reallocation      | 11,381          | 60                             | 0.38                        | 13,513          | 99                             | 0.40                        |
| Others entering   | 1,765           | 9                              | 0.06                        | 3,210           | 23                             | 0.09                        |
| Exit              | 61,012          | 320                            | 2.03                        | 79,978          | 583                            | 2.36                        |
| Seniors           | 49,630          | 260                            | 1.65                        | 66,465          | 485                            | 1.96                        |
| Reallocation      | 11,381          | 60                             | 0.38                        | 13,513          | 99                             | 0.40                        |
| Others exiting    | 0               | 0                              | 0.00                        | 0               | 0                              | 0.00                        |
| Employment growth | 19,059          | 100                            | 0.63                        | 13,716          | 100                            | 0.41                        |

Sources: Calculations based on Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts ; Sveriges Officiella statistik (Official Statistics of Sweden); Folkra kningen (population census) 1945; Folk och bostadsra kningen (population and housing census) 1965 and 1990.

## Concluding Remarks

This study shows that structural change in itself has underwent changes during the past 150 years. To start with, a positive contribution from structural change to aggregated productivity growth is clearly noticeable throughout the period 1850 1960. From the mid-1960s the contribution of structural /C1 change has been predominantly negative on the sectoral level. In addition, the relative contribution of reallocated jobs from contracting industries to expanding industries became larger from the postwar period as compared to previous periods. A larger proportion of the stock of employed was therefore affected by job transfers between sectors during the same period. It is thus likely that the

employed, 1850 2000. /C1

Sources: Calculations based on Sveriges Officiella statistik (Official Statistics of Sweden); Folkra kningen (population census) 1945; Folk och bostadsra kningen (population and housing census) 1965 and 1990; Krantz and Scho n, Swedish Historical National Accounts .

Figure 7 Job losses and reallocation of employment normalized by stock

<!-- image -->

extent of sectoral reallocation of labour is higher today than previously. This highlights the fact that the sectoral reallocation of labour, especially up to the 1950s, was often aided by young people entering expanding industries, which was mainly possible due to population growth. Lower population growth tends to increase the relative importance of reallocation of labourers from one sector to another. One could speculate whether this poses new challenges to Swedish society.

New Growth Theory emphasises the role of human capital for productivity gains and growth. Skills gained through learning-by-doing or on-the-job training is assumed to be important for augmenting the productivity of human capital. Thus, we argue that human capital is augmented by skills that are earned through learning-by-doing. Presumably these skills are to some degree industry-specific. Depending on the importance of on-the-job training and the degree to which these skills are industry-specific, labour transfers from contracting to expanding industries poses more challenges compared to shifts due to net-growth of employment and presumably related to generational labour mobility. This is due to the scrapping of skills augmenting human capital (industry-specific knowledge becomes irrelevant in a new industry), which results from labour transfer. Correspondingly, these skills have to be regenerated through learning-by-doing in the new industry. Even additional investment in human capital (i.e., formal education) may be necessary. Thus, the risk of structural unemployment increases with the degree that the skills gained through learning-by-doing are industry-specific. However, conclusive statements require further research and qualification of the findings here presented.