<!-- image -->

Chapters on Machinery and Labor

Author(s): George E. Barnett

Source: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 40, No. 1 (Nov., 1925), pp. 111-133

Published by: Oxford University Press

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/1885817 .

Accessed: 18/06/2014 11:32

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

Oxford University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

<!-- image -->

## CHAPTERS ON MACHINERY AND LABOR III. MACHINERY  AND THE DISPLACEMENT OF SKILL

## SUMMARY

Definition of  displacement of  skill, 112.  The  factors determining the amount of  displacement, 112.  Rapidity of  introduction of the machine,  113.  The  mobility of  labor  within  the  trade, 117.  Effect of the  machine  in increasing  demand  for the  product,  121.  The  labordisplacing  power  of the  machine,  126.Extent  to  which  the  skill  of the handworker  is  useful in the machine  process, 127.  Variety of  combination  of factors, 132.

That machines do  not, even at their  first introduction, invariably throw human labor  out of  employment, must be  admitted; and  it has  been  maintained, by  persons  very  competent to  form  an  opinion on  the  subject, that they never produce that effect. The  solution of this question depends on  facts, which, unfortunately, have not yet been  collected; and  the  circumstance of our  not possessing the data necessary for  the  full examination of so  important a  subject, supplies an  additional reason for impressing upon  the  minds of all who are  interested in such inquiries the importance of procuring accurate registries, at various times, of the  number of  persons employed in particular branches of manufacture, of the number of machines used  by  them, and  of  the  wages they receive.'

SINCE the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the effects  of machinery  on  labor have  engaged  the  attention  of many  economists. The  resulting  discussion has centered  chiefly  around  two  questions: the  effect  of machinery  on  the  general rate  of  wages,  and  the  part played by machinery as a cause of unemployment. The present chapter deals with  a third effect of machinery, -the  displacement of  skill.

1. Charles Babbage, Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, Fourth  Edition,  1835,  pp.  336-337.

By  displacement  of  skill,  in  the  sense  in  which  the term is here used,  is meant  the  loss of the  opportunity to  sell  acquired skill  at  the  rate  of remuneration which would have  been received if the  machine had not  been introduced. Displacement, therefore,  does  not  necessarily  mean  loss  of  employment. If  the  employment after the  introduction  of  the  machine,  and  as  a  consequence thereof,  is  at  a lower rate of remuneration, displacement of skill has occurred.  In a skilled trade, there is  at  any  time  an amount of skill which may  be valued at  a  certain sum. This  sum is the  discounted  value  of all  the  premiums  above  the  price  of  unskilled  labor which the  skilled workmen would have  collected  if the machine had not  been introduced. If  any  part  of  this expectation  is lost  through the  introduction  of machinery,  a displacement of skill has occurred

The  factors  determining  the  extent  of  the  displacement  of skill  consequent  upon the  introduction  of machinery may be enumerated as follows:  (1)  the rapidity of introduction of the machine, (2) the mobility of labor within  the  skilled  trade  affected,  (3)  the  effect  of  the machine in reducing the price of the manufactured article and thus increasing demand, (4) the labor-displacing power of  the machine,  (5) the  extent  to  which the  skill of  the  handworker is  useful  in  the  machine  process. Altho  economic discussion has not  been directed in detail  to  the  particular  question  here  considered,  many economic writers, in the course of their treatment of the effects of machinery on general wages or on unemployment,  have  expressed  opinions  as  to  the  operation  of some of these factors.  These opinions will be examined under their respective heads.  The facts used have been drawn chiefly from studies of particular cases of the introduction of machinery in skilled trades, published at

various times by the writer. In the present chapter the assumption  has  been  made  throughout  that  economic forces  are working on  a purely  competitive  basis. Accordingly,  no  account  has  been  taken  of  any  form  of intervention. The chief modifying force in the working of  these  factors  in  the  past  has  been  the  trade  unions of  the handworkers.  In a final chapter the possibilities and  achievements  of  trade-union  intervention  will  be considered.

I

The  assumption  that  the  rate of introduction  of machinery  was likely  to  be slow has had a long history  in economic writing.  J.  B.  Say  laid it  down as one of the characteristics of the introduction of machinery, ameliorative  in its  effect,  that  "new  machines are slowly  constructed  and still  more slowly  brought  into  use."  I By far the most elaborate development  of this doctrine was that of Professor J. S. Nicholson, in his book "  The Effects of Machinery on Wages," first published in 1878. Professor Nicholson's  "Law  of  Continuity"  is divided into two parts.  The first asserts that  "  a radical change made in  the  methods  of  invention will  be gradually and continuously adopted."  4 More concretely, he says:

Suppose that a  radical change is  introduced by  some ingenious producer into a  certain manufacture which  will  lead  to  the  employment of  less labor. That this process will be  adopted in  process of time by  all  other manufacturers is  evident, but I  maintain that in comparison with  the  mobility of  labor  the  process will  be  slow.

- 2. "The Introduction of  the Linotype," Yale Review, November, 1904,  pp.  251-273; "The  Stonecutters' Union  and  the  Stone-Planer," Journal  of Political  Economy, May,  1916,  pp.  417-444; "The  Introduction  of  Semi-Automatic Bottle Machinery," Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, May, 1925, pp. 337-356; "The Introduction of Automatic Bottle Machines," Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics, August, 1925,  pp. 544-575.
- 3. J.  B.  Say,  A  Treatise on  Political Economy, New  American Edition,  Philadelphia, 1848, p.  87.
- 4. J.  S.  Nicholson, The  Effects of Machinery on  Wages,  new  and revised  edition, 1892,  p.  33. The  italics  are  Professor Nicholson's.

The second part of the "Law of Continuity"  sets forth that  "these  radical  changes  tend  to  give  place  to  advances  by  small  increases of invention." To  the  same effect  is  Professor  S.  J.  Chapman's  assertion: "New inventions  are slowly  adopted  as  a  rule,  and,  at  first, owing to their imperfections, the saving in labor effected by  them is usually  small."  I

In their discussions, Professor Chapman and Professor Nicholson  were concerned chiefly with the effect of machinery  on  unemployment, but the  "Law  of  Continuity" has  a  direct  relation  to  displacement  of  skill. Professor  Nicholson  recognizes this  relationship  in  the following passage:

This destruction of  the laborer's only capital is  one of  the most pernicious effects of  machinery and when it happens there is and can be  no  remedy. Still, if the changes are  gradual the evil consequences are  not  so  great.6

Before  considering the  possible  effects of  a slow rate of introduction  in conserving skill, it will be convenient to examine the various causes of slowness, since the possibilities  of diminishing displacement  turn largely upon the  character of the retardation.

## 1. The retarding force on which Professor Nicholson lays greatest emphasis is the inertia of the manufacturer.

The  more  enterprising the capitalist [he says],  the  sooner he  will make any  change, but the change  will  not in  reference to labor be sudden. . . The  change  will  at  first  be  adopted by  some  enterprising capitalist in  the centre of  a  highly competitive region and  will gradually extend to  the  manufactories of  less competent masters in more  remote districts.7

An examination  of the history  of the  introduction  of machinery in the  glass bottle, printing  and stonecutting trades does not confirm the opinion that the retardation

- 5. S.  J.  Chapman, Outlines  of  Political Economy, 1911,  p.  84.
- 6. Nicholson, op.  cit.,  p.  44.
- 7. Ibid.,  pp.  36-37.

due to  inertia  is  sufficiently  long  to  be  important. On the contrary, it appears that where a machine is sold or leased to  any manufacturer willing  to  pay  the  price, it is introduced with great rapidity. The stone-planer was fully  introduced  in  about  seven  years; the  period  of introduction of the linotype did not cover more than ten years; the  number  of  narrow-mouth  semi-automatic bottle  machines  did not  increase much  after six years; the  "flow  and  feed"  devices  for  making  bottles  were fully  introduced  in five years.8  In  all these  cases there was some increase in the number of machines after the period of introduction,  but  it  was  due  to  expansion  in production  and  not  to  the  displacement  of  the  hand process.

- 2. The  second  cause  of  slowness  of  introduction, noted  both  by  Professor  Nicholson  and  by  Professor Chapman,  is  the  increasing  capacity  of  the  machines, partly  because  of improvements  in  the  construction  of the  machine and partly because of the  greater speed of the operatives.  In the machines studied, this factor was of great importance.  The first operators of the linotype produced  much  less  than  the  present  operators. The stone-planer was improved in speed by various modifications of its  form and a great increase secured in output per  man  employed. The  semi-automatic bottle machine gained in efficiency over a considerable period of time. The  capacity  of the  Owens bottle  machine more than  trebled in  ten  years. Less important  yet  notable improvements  have  been made in "flow  and feed"  devices  for the  automatic  manufacture of glass bottles.9

8. "The Stonecutters' Union and  the Stone-Planer," pp.  417-418; "The  Introduction of the Linotype," p.  252;  "The  Introduction of SemiAutomatic  Bottle  Machinery,"  p. 341; "The  Introduction of Automatic Bottle Machines,"  p.  569.

- 9. "The  Introduction of  the  Linotype," p.  254; "The  Stonecutters' Union  and  the  Stone-Planer," p.  419; "The  Introduction of Automatic Bottle Machines,"  pp.  547-550.

## 116 QUARTERLY JOURNAL  OF ECONOMICS

- 3. A  third  cause  of  slowness  in  the  introduction  of machines is the necessity of adapting the machine to the various products made  by  the  skilled  handworker.  It must be an extremely rare case in which machinery has superseded  an  entire  skilled  trade. The  scope  of  the machine, even  when it  reaches its  fullest  development, is  almost  always  narrower than  the  entire  handicraft. The  extension  of  the  machine  to  its  final limit  of performance usually requires time.  The early stone-planers covered  much  less  of  the  stonecutters'  original  trade than  the  more recent forms.  The  present  type-setting and type-casting  machines have a wider range than the earlier forms.  Machinery for making glass bottles  originally made only wide-mouth heavy ware.  The scope of the machines was gradually extended to  other forms of ware, but the period of extension was a long one, reaching from 1895 to  1917.1
- 4. A final cause of retardation, in the introduction of some machines, is the restriction placed on the use of the machine by the patentee  in order to profit more largely by  his  invention. From  this  point  of  view,  machines may be divided broadly into two classes, accordingly as the patentee, on the one hand, sells or leases the machine to any one who will pay the price or, on the other hand, retains entirely the use of the machine or sells exclusive rights  to  particular manufacturers.  In  the  latter  case, the  manufacturers  using  the  machine  may  prefer  to make  larger  profits  on  part  of  the  total  production, rather than to lower prices sufficiently to drive out competitors  using  inferior forms of  production. This  form of retardation can never outlast  the  patent  rights,  and may be terminated sooner by  the  invention  of another machine, or a change of policy on the part of the manu-
- 1. "The  Stonecutters' Union  and  the  Stone-Planer," p.  419; "The Introduction of  Automatic Bottle Machines," pp.  551-552.

facturer. The  policy  of  selling  rights  to  manufacture particular  kinds  of  bottles to  selected  manufacturers was pursued by the Owens Bottle  Company.  The policy of  retaining  the  use  of  its  own  machines  has  been  followed  by  the  American Window  Glass  Company.2  In both cases, a very considerable retardation in the introduction  of the machines resulted.

From the foregoing, it may  be concluded that  the introduction of machinery is rarely, if ever,  catastrophic, and that  a considerable period is likely  to  elapse before the machine has reached its limits as a potential  force in displacing skill.  Does  the existence of this period lessen the  total  amount of displacement?

II

The  extent  to  which  slowness  of  introduction  salvages skill depends on the degree to which the inflow of labor into  the  hand  trade  is  stopped,  and  the  existing skill utilized  to fill available positions.3  Whether inflow is stopped or checked depends in turn chiefly on whether the  skilled  labor in  the  trade  is  sufficiently  mobile. In any particular case, there may be other factors in checking inflow, such as trade-union action,  or there may  be factors promoting inflow, such as the desire to profit by

- 2. "Introduction of  Automatic Bottle Machines," pp.  549-550; The Glass  Industry  as affected  by  the  War,  Tariff  Information Series,  No.  5, p.  139.
- 3. Professor  Chapman  in dealing  with  the  problem  of unemployment as an effect  of machinery,  where the  same  reasoning  is pertinent, appears to  assume  that  inflow  would  cease  automatically. Ile says, "Moreover it must  be  remembered  that  a  re-direction of the labor  of  the rising generation alone  can  bring  about  great  changes  rapidly,  especially in  a growing  society. An  unrecruited  industry  shrinks  at  an  increasing  pace and in a decade  its  shrinkage  must  be considerable. The  amount  of labor displacement, if  any, caused  by  new  machinery depends  upon  the  rate at  which  new  machinery  is introduced." Chapman,  Outlines  of Political Economy,  p.  84.

apprentices.  Generally speaking, however, the effective check to inflow is the mobility  of the existing skill in the trade.

The  immobility  of skilled labor takes  various forms. Almost  every  trade is split  up into  specialized sections, either  cobperant  or  independent,  passage  from  one  to another of which may be difficult.  Workmen may  prefer  to  forego  the  exercise of  their  skilled  trades  rather than to incur the disadvantages  involved  in removal to other localities. The older workmen find great difficulty in learning the operation of the new machines even when the skill of  the handworker is wanted for the operation of  the  machines. Not  infrequently  two  of  these  three primary obstacles to mobility  are combined against the movement  of a single workman.

If machines were introduced piece-meal, that  is, if an employer installed one machine and then later another, in  the  meantime  having  identical  work done by  hand, the  stopping  of  inflow  into  the  trade  would  naturally result from the  introduction  of machines,  since  an employer  ordinarily would  not  train  new  workmen when there was already a sufficient supply.  But  the introduction  of  machinery  does  not  proceed  in  this  manner. Usually  machinery is introduced completely  in a single plant,  that  is, all work of the same kind is done by machine and not part by machine and part by hand.  There is bound to be a surplus of skilled workmen at that point. to be absorbed in some other factory in the same kind of skilled work, or in the  same factory  in some  co~perant form of  handwork or in working the  machine. If  they are not  thus employed,  skill is displaced.

It  is  entirely  conceivable,  therefore, that  slowness  of introduction  may  have  no  effect  in  lessening  the  displacement of skilled labor.  Unless the men thrown  out by the machine secure employment in one of the three ways

enumerated,  slowness  of introduction  would  not  affect the total amount of displacement.  The persons affected, of course, would not be identical  with  those who would have been  displaced  by a  more  rapid  introduction. Many  of those  in  the  trade  at  the  time  of  the  first introduction of machinery would be able to exercise their skill for a longer period of time,  but  the  persons  entering  the  trade  thereafter  would  suffer displacement,  as a group, in  an amount  equal  to  that  salvaged  by  their predecessors.

The influence of mobility  in lessening the  amount  of displacement is not limited by slowness of introduction. Where the skill of  the handworker is useful  in the machine  process, either  as  a  co~perant  handworker or as a machine operator, the ability of workers already in the trade to shift to these positions  is a factor in the  avoidance of displacement.4

Illustrations of the effect of immobility on the amount of displacement may be drawn from the history of the introduction of machinery in various trades.  The introduction of the linotype was accompanied by conditions highly favorable to the avoidance of displacement of skill. The increase in the demand for printed matter after a short time was great;  skilled printers were used as operators for the machines.  Skilled men were used as cobperant workers.  The total number of skilled workers in the  trade steadily  increased.  Even  under these  conditions,  there  was  a  considerable  amount  of  displacement. The  older hand  compositors were generally  not able  to  secure employment  as  machine  operators,  and there was a surplus of the particular specialized form of skill which  they possessed. The  younger  men  were drawn into  machine  work from  other  branches  in  the trade. The places thus  vacated  were filled to  some ex-

4. See  below,  pp.  128,  130.

tent  by  men  who  had  been  displaced  by  the  machine, but  chiefly by  an increased inflow into  the trade.5

The  introduction  of  the  semi-automatic  bottle  machine presents a similar case.  The machine was capable of  making  only  wide-mouth  bottles; the  remainder of the  trade  was  entirely  unaffected. During  the  whole period  of  its  introduction there  was  a  constant and large increase in the  total  number of glass-bottle  blowers,  but the displacement  of  skill  was  considerable. Many  of the  men who formerly had made wide-mouth bottles  were not able to make satisfactorily  other forms of  bottles, or  were  unwilling  to  remove  to  the  places where such bottles were made.  The inflow into the other branches of the trade was sufficiently enlarged to furnish the needed workers.6

The  introduction  of  the  Owens  bottle  machine  was characterized by displacement of the same kind.  As the machine successively invaded various parts of the trade, the  transfer of the  workers supplanted  by  the  machine to the unaffected branches was very imperfectly accomplished.  From 1905 to 1917, the total  number of skilled blowers and machine operators fell from 9000 to  4000, yet  in most  of these years the influx of apprentices was considerable.7  In  the  case  of  the  stone-planer  the  displacement of skill was increased by a change in the location  of  the  industry,  as  the  hand  work supplementary to the machine, to a very considerable extent, was transferred to the quarries.  The migration of stonecutters  to these centers, while large, was insufficient to fill the need, and an inflow into  the  trade  resulted  at  the  very  time when stonecutters were being displaced at other points."

- 5. "The  Introduction of  the  Linotype," p.  263.
- 6. "The  Introduction of  Semi-Automatic Bottle Machinery,"  p.  343.
- 7. "The  Introduction of  Automatic Bottle Machines," pp.  558,  566.
- 8. "The  Stonecutters' Union  and  the  Stone-Planer," pp.  438-439.

## III

Very early in the discussion of the effect of machinery on the  general rate  of wages,  the  apologists  of the  machine  began  to  argue that  the  machine  by  cheapening the  price of goods  caused such  a large increase in  consumption as to increase rather than to lessen the demand for  labor. J.  B.  Say  appears  to  have  originated  this argument.  He  said:

The multiplication of a product commonly reduces its price, that reduction  extends  its  consumption; and so its  production,  tho  become more rapid, nevertheless gives employment to more hands than before.9

Say  was  careful to  distinguish  this  as  an  ultimate  and not  an immediate  effect.

The doctrine was stated  very  broadly by most  of the English  economists  of this period.  Even  Malthus,  who was careful to  assert the possibility  of exceptions,  said:

When a machine is  invented,  which,  by  saving  labor will  bring goods into the market at a much cheaper rate than before, the most usual effect is such an extension  of the  demand for the  commodity, by its  being brought within the power of a much greater number of purchasers, that  the  value  of the  whole mass of goods made by  the new  machinery  greatly  exceeds  their  former value; and,  notwithstanding  the  saving  of  labor,  more  hands,  instead  of  fewer,  are required in the  manufacture.'

McCulloch,  while denying  that  the  effect of machinery in  increasing the  production  of  goods  had  anything  to do with  the  advantages  of machinery,  did not  hesitate to  assert that

any  considerable reduction in  the  price of  a  commodity  in  general use,  has  uniformly  almost  been found  to  extend  the  demand  for it in  a  much  greater proportion.2

- 9. Say, A  Treatise on  Political Economy, New  American  Edition, 1848, p. 88.
- 1. T.  R.  Maithus, Principles  of  Political Economy, Second  Edition, 1836,  p.  352.
- 2. J. R.  McCulloch,  Principles  of  Political Economy,  Second  Edition, 1830,  p.  189.

Babbage appears to have been the first English writer of importance to express a doubt  as to the  "usualness" of  an increase in employment  consequent  upon the  introduction  of machinery. In  a  cautious  and hesitating chapter, he asserted that  "the  solution  of this  question depends  on  facts  which  unfortunately  have  not  been collected." He  submitted data collected by  himself from  various  sources  as  to  the  actual  increase  in  employment  in  cotton  manufacture,  but  reached no  definite  conclusion.3  Mill  was  equally  cautious:

I  cannot  assent  to  the  argument  relied on by  most  of those  who contend that  machinery can never be injurious to the laboring class, namely,  that  by  cheapening production it  creates such an increased demand for the  commodity as enables, ere long, a greater number of persons  than  ever  to  find  employment  in  producing  it. The  fact tho  too  broadly stated  is, no doubt,  often  true.4

In  more  recent  times  economic  writers  have  offered various  opinions. Mr.  John  A.  Hobson,  who  has  discussed  the  question  exhaustively,  reaches  this  conclusion:

The  assumption,  however,  that machinery  must  increase  the aggregate employment, either in this particular trade itself, or in that trade  plus  the  machine  making and subsidiary  trades, is, of course, unwarranted.  All depends upon the  effect of the  machine in lowering selling price and the effect of the lower selling price upon effective demand.  In no two cases will these  effects be quite  the  same.5

Professor  Pigou,  in  reviewing  the  opinions  of  recent writers, says:

An occasional failure of this kind is admitted by all.  Still, broadly speaking,  inventions,  as  a  general  rule  are  believed  by  those  who have  studied  the  matter  to  increase  and  not  to  diminish,  employment at the point at which they  act. . . Now I am not concerned to deny the empirical part of these conclusions.  I do not dispute the Poor Law Commissioners' assertion that  the conditions necessary to

- 4. J.  S.  Mill,  Principles of  Political Economy, 1848,  p.  113.
- 5. J.  A.  Hobson, The  Industrial System, 1909,  pp.  280-281.

secure  that increased  employment  in  any  sphere  will  ultimately result from an invention  in that  sphere are, as a matter of practice, usually fulfilled.6

Since  the  question  is,  as  Professor  Pigou  phrases  it, an  "empirical"  one,  a  final  solution  could  be  reached only by an actual count.  It is certain that in some  cases no  adequate  increase in  demand  occurs.  Whether  the class  of  cases  in  which  a  fully  compensating  demand occurs is larger or smaller than that  in which it does not, is  unknown. Certainly  the  probability  of  the  occurrence of such a compensating increase in employment is far less than it was thought to be by most of the classical economists.

There  is  one  theoretical  consideration  which  counts heavily  against  the  "usualness"  of a compensating  increase in production. The saving on direct labor cost for each  unit  produced,  which  accompanies  the  introduction of machinery, is certain, for two reasons, to be in a greater percentage than the reduction in the price of the article.  In the first place, the cost of the machinery and royalties  must  enter into  the  price. Secondly,  the  cost of the  material  is  ordinarily not  changed by  the  introduction  of  machinery. If, therefore,  the  elasticity of demand for the  article is not  greater than  one, the percentage increase in production will be less than the percentage  reduction  in  the  unit  labor  cost. Under  these conditions,  unless  the  rate  of  wages  is  reduced  by  the substitution of  cheaper labor,  the  number of  laborers will be reduced.

There is still another consideration applicable to some cases  of  the  introduction  of  machinery,  which  makes against  the  probability  of  a  large  increase in  demand, occurring within  a period  of  time  sufficiently  short  to benefit the workers already in the trade.  Where the use

6. A.  C.  Pigou,  The  Economics of  Welfare, 1920,  pp.  717-718.

of the machine is confined to the patentees  or to selected manufactures, the users of the machine may decide that their interests lie in upholding prices rather than in giving the public a larger part of the benefits of the invention. The expansion in demand  which might be achieved  by  lower prices is  estimated  less  highly  than the  certainty  of  larger  unit  profits. Both  the  Owens Bottle Company  and  the American  Window  Glass Company marketed their patents  on the principle that less  would  be  gained  by  a  destructive  price war,  than by  taking  a considerable part  of the  market  at  a more remunerative  price.' This  policy, as  has  been  noted above,  operates  to  retard  the  introduction  of  the  machine, but  it  also operates to  retard the  fall in price.

In the cases of the introduction of machinery studied, the increase in demand within  the introductory period, which alone has any effect in bringing about the avoidance of displacement of skill, has been an important factor in one field only, that  of the introduction of the linotype. From 1887 to  1895 the  cheapening in the  cost  of composition  through  the  introduction  of  the  linotype did not lead to  a compensating  increase in demand for labor,  but  from  1895  on  there  was  a  considerable  increase in the amount of printing done, which after 1897 was sufficient to compensate for the labor saved  by the machine. The  character  of  this  increase  in  demand, however,  was  peculiar. If  it  had  taken  the  form  of  a reduction  in  price and  an increased volume  of sales  of existing  newspapers and magazines, the  printers would not have benefited, altho the pressmen would have been helped. Fortunately  for the  printers,  the  cheaper cost of composition led to competition  among the publishers in  the  size  of  the  newspapers. Some  increase  in  the

- 7. The  Glass  Industry as  affected by  the  War: Tariff  Information Series,  No.  5,  pp.  75,  79,  129.
- 8. "Introduction of  the  Linotype," pp.  254-255.

number  of  newspapers  and  magazines  and  in  other kinds  of  printing  was  attributable  to  the  cheaper cost of composition, but it was relatively  unimportant.

The  use  of  the  stone-planer  materially  lowered  the price  of  cut  stone, but  the  output did  not  increase. This curious situation was attributed in the trade to the increasing  competition of terra-cotta and  concrete.9 After  the  semi-automatic bottle machine  was  introduced,  the price  of  wide-mouth bottles  the only kind made at that  time on the machine was reduced somewhat. The  increase in  production,  however,  was far  from  sufficient  to compensate  for  the  saving  in skilled labor.  There was at the time a rapidly widening use of bottles  as containers, but the increase in the production  of  wide-mouth  bottles was  not appreciably greater than that  of other classes of bottles,  despite the fact  that  some users of bottles  substituted  wide-mouth bottles  for narrow-mouth bottles.1  From  1905 to  1914, the  decrease in the price of bottles  made on the  Owens bottle  machine  was,  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained, about  15 per cent,  and the  production  of  all classes  of bottles taken together doubled.  The rate of increase was no  greater  in  this  period,  however,  for  the  classes  of bottles  made on the Owens machine than it had been in the  period from  1899 to  1904. The  great  extension  in the  use  of  bottles  from  1899 to  1919  appears to  have been due primarily to changes in taste which demanded glass-packed goods for sanitary reasons.2

In  none  of  the  foregoing  cases,  except  that of  the linotype, can  any  considerable  degree  of  increase  in production be ascribed with  certainty  to  a reduction in

- 9. "The  Stonecutters' Union  and  the  Stone-Planer," p.  420.
- 1. "The Introduction of Semi-Automatic Bottle Machinery," pp. 342-343.
- 2. "The  Introduction of  Semi-Automatic Bottle Machinery,"  p. 342; "The  Introduction of  Automatic Bottle Machines," p.  548.

cost due to the introduction of the machine.  Other factors,  the  changes  in  demand  due  to  taste  and  the  entrance  of  competing  products, played so much  the larger part in determining the amount produced during the period of introduction that  the effect of price reductions was relatively  unimportant.

IV

If  the  increase in production due to  the  introduction of  machinery  were always  directly  proportional  to  the displacing power of the machine, displacing power would be only an element in increase in production.  Since this is not the case, the displacing power of the machine is to be regarded as a primary factor in determining displacement. A  case  of  high  displacing  power  coming  under the observation of Senior was responsible for a modification  in  the  doctrine  of  a  compensating  increase in  demand. He said:

A  small  screw  was  shown  to  us  at  Birmingham  which,  in  the manufacture of corkscrews, performed the  work of  fifty-nine  men; with  its  assistance  one  man  could  cut  a  spiral  groove  in  as  many corkscrew shanks as sixty  men could have cut in the same time with the tools previously in use.  As the use of corkscrews is limited,  it is not  probable that  the demand for them has sufficiently increased to enable  the  whole  number  of  laborers previously  employed  in  their manufacture to  remain so employed  after such an increase in their productive  power.  Some of the  corkscrew makers, therefore, must have  been thrown out  of work, and the  rate of  wages in that  trade probably  fell.  . . The  example  taken  from  the  manufacture  of corkscrews is  as  unfavorable  to  the  effects  of  machinery  as  can  be proposed;  for the use of the  commodity  is supposed to be unable to keep up with the increased power of production and the whole number of  laborers employed  on  it  is  consequently  diminished. This, however, is a very  rare occurrence.  The  usual  effect of  an increase in the facility of producing a commodity is so to increase its consumption  as  to  occasion  the  employment  of  more,  not  less,  labor  than before.3

3. Nassau William Senior,  Political Economy, Third Edition, pp. 165-166.

In the cases of the introduction of machinery studied, the  displacing  power  of  the  machines  varied  widely. One man on the stone-planer is capable of producing as much as eight men can produce by hand.  One man on the  semi-automatic  bottle  machine  can make  as many bottles  as four hand-blowers.  A  linotype  operator can set  up  as much matter  as four hand-compositors. The Owens bottle  machine  in its  latest  forms is  capable  of an output per operative equal to that  of eighteen handblowers.  The displacing power of the machine in all the cases studied, as has already been noted, was less at the beginning  of  the  period  of  introduction,  than  it  was later.

V

The  final  factor  in  determining  the  amount  of  displacement  is  the  degree to  which  the  skill  of  the  hand worker is useful in connection with the machine process. This demand for skill may take one or both of two forms. First,  the  machine  may  take  over  only  one  of  several co6perant parts of a trade and leave  the  other parts of the  trade untouched,  as in printing,  where proof-reading,  and make-up were unaffected  by  the  linotype; or in  stonecutting,  where carving and  some other parts of the  work of  the  stonecutter  could  not  be  done  by  the planer.  In such cases, it is possible that  a small expansion in demand may be sufficient to retain the same total number of skilled workmen.  When,  however,  the  part of the trade affected by the machine is relatively  small, the reduction in price is likely  also to be small.

This  factor  was of relatively  small importance in salvaging  the  skill  of  the  stonecutters  since,  as has  been noted above, no increase in demand occurred. The introduction of the linotype,  on the  contrary, was accompanied by a large increase in the  number of proof-readers,

make-ups and other auxiliary skilled workmen required. This  increase was  of considerable importance in  avoiding  displacement,  altho,  as  has  been  noted  above,  its full  effect  was  not  realized on  account  of the  difficulty of  moving  compositors  on  straight  matter  into  other positions.

The  second  form of  the  demand for  the  skill  of  the handworker  in  connection  with  the  machine  process, occurs where  the  skill  of  the  handworker is  useful  in some  degree  in  the  working  of  the  machine. Even  if there is no increase in the  demand for the article, if the skill  of  the  handworker  is  useful,  the  employment  of part  of  the  handworkers  at  something  more than  the wage of an unskilled worker is certain.

The  classical  economists,  for the  most  part,  did  not concern themselves  with  the  effects  of  a change  in  the quality  of the  labor caused by  the  introduction  of machinery, since they  were intent  on the effect of machinery on general wages. They  were inclined to  minimize the  hardships  of  displacement  of  skill. Thus  McCulloch,  after admitting  that  there may  be cases in which there is a reduction in the number of persons employed in the  trade affected, says:

Ultimately, therefore,  the  introduction  of  machines  cannot  fail of  being  highly  advantageous  to  the  laborer;  and  even  when  first resorted to, they  never impose on him any other hardship than that of  occasionally  forcing him  to  change his  business. This,  however, is seldom a very material one.  A person trained to habits of industry and application  can be  easily  moved  from one  employment  to  another. It  is  easy for  a weaver of  cottons to  become a  weaver of woolens or linen.4

Appropriately  enough,  Babbage,  the  discoverer of  the fourth  principle  of  the  division  of  labor,  was  the  first writer of distinction  to dwell at length  upon this aspect

- 4. McCulloch, Principles  of  Political Economy, Second  Edition, pp. 194-195.

of the problem.  After citing statistics  as to the increased number of weavers  employed  after  the  introduction  of power looms, he says:

In considering this increase of employment,  it  must  be admitted that  the  two  thousand  persons thrown  out  of work are not  exactly of  the  same  class  as  those  called  into  employment  by  the  powerlooms. A hand-weaver  must  possess  bodily  strength,  which  is  not essential for a person attending  a power loom;  consequently,  women and young persons of both  sexes, from fifteen to  seventeen  years of age, find employment  in power-loom factories.5

The superiority of  the  handworker as  an operator of the  machine  over  the  unskilled  worker is  a  matter  of degree.  The probability that  a machine which performs the  work  formerly  done  by  skilled  handworkers  will require for its  operation  exactly  the  skill  possessed  by the handworker must be very small.  On the other hand, the  probability  that the  machine  will  require  for  its most  successful  working  some  part  of  the  skill  of  the handworker  is  large. Whether  the  skill  possessed  by the  handworkers will  be salvaged by their  employment as  operatives  depends,  therefore,  upon  several  factors: (1) the overhead cost of operating the machine; (2) the degree to which the skill of the handworker contributes to  the  successful working of the  machine; and  (3)  the relative  price of  skilled  and unskilled  labor. The  vari-

## 5. Babbage,  Economy  of  Manufactures, Fourth  Edition, p.  339.

A lively  appreciation  of the  effects  of the  displacement of  skill  on  the hand-worker  led  the  same  writer  to  offer  suggestions as  to  how  the  individuals affected might  minimize the evil consequences. "Increased intelligence amongst the working  classes may  enable  them  to  foresee some  of  those improvements which  are  likely  for  a  time  to  affect  the value  of  their  labour,  and  the  assistance of  Savings  Bank  and  Friendly Societies (the  advantages of  which  can  never  be  too  frequently or  too strongly  pressed  upon  their  attention), may  be of some  avail  in remedying the  evil; but it may  be useful  also to suggest  to them,  that  a diversity of  employments amongst  the  members  of  one  family  will  tend,  in  some measure,  to  mitigate the  privations which  arise  from  fluctuation in  the value  of  labour." Ibid.,  p.  340.

ous  combinations  of  these  factors  may  be  illustrated from the history  of the introduction  of machinery.

When the  linotype  was  being  introduced,  it  was  believed  by  many  employers  that  the  machines  could be profitably operated by persons who had not had a training as printers.  It was soon found, however, that almost every  part of the  skill of the  hand  compositor is useful in  the  working  of  the  machine  and  that  printers were far more efficient than  those  who had  no knowledge  of the  trade. The  overhead  cost  of  the  machine interest, maintenance,  rent of space,  power,  etc. is almost  identical  whether  the  daily  output  is  large  or small, and this overhead cost is relatively  large in comparison with  the  daily  wage  of  the  operative. Under these  conditions  a  much  smaller  difference  in  output between  printers  and  unskilled  workers than  actually existed  would  have  been  sufficient to  turn  the  scale  in favor of skilled hand compositors as machine operators.6

A  somewhat  similar situation  was  presented  by  the introduction  of  the  semi-automatic bottle machines. Here the  skill required was  certainly  far less  than  that required for  blowing  bottles  by  hand. The  issue  presented was not, however, whether skilled men should be employed,  but  whether the  bottle-blowers  or workmen of a kindred  trade gatherers  and  pressers possessed in higher degree the  requisite skill. The  contest was finally decided, chiefly by the pressure of the blowers' union, in favor of the bottle-blowers. That the bottle-blowers  possessed  skill  which  was  valuable  in  the operation  of  the  machines  is  undoubted. It  is  equally certain  that  much  of  their  skill  was  not  useful  in  the operation of the  machine.  The  output  of the  machine, however,  was  directly  dependent  on  the  skill  of  the operators and the  overhead  cost  was  large. In  a very

6. "The  Introduction of  the  Linotype," pp.  271-273.

short  time,  the  wages  paid  the  machine  operators was as high as that  of skilled bottle-blowers.7

The  circumstances attending  the  introduction  of the stone-planer  were  in  some  respects  favorable  to  the employment  of  skilled  stonecutters. The  output  was dependent on the skill of the operative,  and some of the skill of the stonecutter was useful in working the planer. The policy of the union in opposing the introduction  of the  planer,  and  the  relocation  of  the industry,  were largely responsible for the relatively  small employment of the stonecutters  as planer-men.8

The  influence of  a  relatively  large  wage  differential as  an  obstacle  to  the  employment  of  handworkers as machine operatives  is  illustrated  by  the  history  of  the introduction  of  automatic  bottle  machines. When the Owens bottle  machine was introduced  in  1905, the  disparity  in  wages  between  bottle-blowers  and  unskilled workmen was  very  great. The  machine  is  automatic and its speed is not governed by the attendants. Under these  circumstances the  attendants  were drawn almost entirely  from  the  ranks  of  unskilled  labor. The  flow and feed devices for the automatic manufacture of glass bottles,  introduced more than a decade after the Owens machines, require somewhat more attention  on the part of  the  attendants  than  the  Owens machine,  but  their speed  also  is  independent  of  the  attendant. A  great change had  occurred meanwhile,  however,  in  the  relative  wages  of  skilled  bottle-blowers  and  unskilled  laborers. While  in  1905  a  bottle-blower  received  from three to  four times  as much as an unskilled laborer, in 1917 unskilled  laborers were receiving half  as  much as bottle-blowers. Altho  the  amount  of  skill  which  the bottle-blowers  could contribute  to  the  operation of the

- 7. "The  Introduction of  Semi-Automatic Bottle Machinery,"  p.  355. 8. "The  Stonecutters' Union  and  the  Stone-Planer," p.  435.

devices was not large, the employers generally were willing to pay something over and above unskilled wages to secure that  skill.9

In the cases of the introduction of machinery studied, the  five enumerated factors combine in a great variety of ways to bring about great differences in the displacement  of  skill  suffered. The  fortunate  outcome  in  the introduction of the linotype was due to the low displacing power of the machine, the large extent  of the use of skilled men as cobperant workers and as machine operators,  together  with  an increase in  production. The  almost equally fortunate outcome in the case of the semiautomatic bottle  machine was due to the low displacing power of the machine, the small part of the whole trade involved,  the use of skilled men as operators, combined with  a rapid increase in  the  use  of  almost  all forms of glass containers.  The great displacement of skill in the introduction of the stone-planer was due to  a combination of high displacing power, small use of skilled workers  in  connection  with  the  machine  process,  and  no expansion in  production. A  combination  of very  high displacing power, no use  of skilled workers in  the  machine process, the rapid extension of the machine to the different  products  of  the  handworker, despite  a  very rapid growth in production, was responsible for the disastrous experience of the bottle-blowers with  automatic bottle  machinery.

The  question  naturally  arises as  to  whether  greater importance may be ascribed to one or more of these factors as against  the  others.  From one point  of view  the answer is in the negative,  since there are doubtless cases of the introduction of machinery in which each of them

- 9. "The  Introduction of  Automatic Bottle Machines," pp.  562-563, 572.

assumes a leading r6le.  But  from another point of view, a line may be drawn between those factors which make for  the  displacement  of  skill  and  those  factors  which make for its salvage.  The strength of the attacking factors the  labor-displacing power  of  the  machine  and the  rapidity  with  which  it  is  adapted  to  the  various products  and processes of  the  handworker  is  determined by mechanical facts;  it  may,  therefore, be very small or very large.  On the other hand, the  chief salvaging factors the increase in demand and the mobility of  labor  are economic  and  work in a medium  much less  favorable  to  the  attainment  of  great  force. In  a group  of  cases  of  the  introduction  of  machinery,  the variability  in the force of the mechanical attacking  factors is  greater than  in  that  of  the  economic  salvaging factors. From this point of view,  therefore, the leading element  in determining the  displacement  of skill is  the amount of the disturbance, measured chiefly by  the labor-displacing power  of  the  machine  and  the  rapidity with  which  it  invades  the  trade. If  the  disturbance  is large, the  displacement will also, probably, be large.

GEORGE  E.  BARNETT.

THE JOHNS HOPKINS  UNIVERSITY.