<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Explorations in Economic History 50 (2013) 351 -367

## Taking technology to task: The skill content of technological change in early twentieth century United States

## Rowena Gray

University of Essex, Dept. of Economics, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom

Received 14 August 2012 Available online 14 May 2013

## Abstract

This paper uses new data on the task content of occupations to present a new picture of the labor market effects of technological change in pre-WWII United States. I show that, similar to the recent computerization episode, the electri /uniFB01 cation of the manufacturing sector led to a ' hollowing out ' of the skill distribution whereby workers in the middle of the distribution lost out to those at the extremes. OLS estimates show that electri /uniFB01 cation increased the demand for clerical, numerical, planning and people skills relative to manual skills while simultaneously reducing relative demand for the dexterity-intensive jobs which comprised the middle of the skill distribution. Thus, early twentieth century technological change was unskill-biased for blue collar tasks but skillbiased on aggregate. These results are in line with the downward trend in wage differentials within U.S. manufacturing up to 1950. © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

JEL classification: J23; O33; N32; N33 Keywords: Technological change; Skill bias; Electri /uniFB01 cation

## 1. Introduction

Electricity has been described by Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005, p. 1) as one of the ' two most important general purpose technologies , along with computeriza-' tion. Electrification of factories transformed the ways in which goods were manufactured in the United States after 1900. Economic historians have long been interested in this episode but typically the research focus has been on identifying the energy input savings and productivity gains. 1 However, other interesting questions remain -how did the relative position of labor change during this time, and were workers of various skill levels affected differently? Here, I focus on these labor market effects

from 1900 to 1940. Specifically, I use new data on workplace tasks to show that electrification caused a ' hollowing out ' of the skill distribution in manufacturing, similar to the phenomenon described in studies of computerization and inequality in the United States since 1960. In doing so, the paper helps explain why Goldin and Katz (2008) find evidence of skill-bias while Lindert and Williamson (1980) document a fall in the skill premium earned by high-skill blue-collar workers.

This paper takes the most direct approach yet to identifying the skill content of technological change pre-WWII. Previous research has used indirect measures of skill such as average establishment wages as the variable of interest. 2 Furthermore, pre-1940 there

<!-- image -->

are no consistent and nationally-representative measures of education and which motivates the focus on quantity variables in this paper. Here, skill is measured directly, according to the task composition of each job, and the impact of technological change on the relative demand for managerial, clerical, dexterity and manual tasks is identified. I define a task as a particular activity that is required of an occupation, or the intensity with which a particular skill is used. For example, the ' manual ' measure describes the extent to which strength is needed in an occupation, while the ' clerical ' measure details the degree of numerical and office skills required in a job. 3 Evidence from manufacturing suggests that relative demand for workers intensive in clerical and managerial skills increased compared to those specializing in manual and dexterity skills while, focusing on the factory floor, workers intensive in manual skills increased in importance relative to those using dexterity and craft skills. This pattern of polarization in the skill distribution is a new result for the electrification era. 4 Indeed, the task data shows a 15 percentage point decline in dexterity intensity relative to manual intensity from 1880 to 1920 and electricity explains 80% of that change. 5 These results are also supported by new evidence presented by Katz and Margo (2013) which documents hollowing out in U.S. manufacturing during this period, using more conventional data on employment shares of broad occupational groups.

This result has potential implications for the historical literature on inequality. Previous research portrayed technological change in this era as being simply skillbiased or education-biased at all levels of production. In particular, Goldin and Katz (2008) looked across industries that were adopting electric power at different rates over the period 1909 to 1940 and showed that in 1940 industries that had adopted electricity more quickly over the period 1909 to 1929 employed more educated blue collar workers. Thus, they concluded that technology was skill-biased and that the downward trend in the education premium to 1950 must be explained by the increased supply of educated workers as a result of the ' high-school revolution . However, I show here that, for ' the bulk of workers (the 80% employed on the factory floor), electrification led to unskill-biased technological

change, which may provide an alternative explanation for falling wage differentials between artisanal and manual workers. 6 In this paper, I will focus simply on showing the effects of electrification on the skill distribution and leave the full implications of these results on the wage distribution for future research.

Technological change has had remarkably consistent labor market effects over at least a century and a half. Various authors, notably Atack et al. (2004), have shown that the move from artisanal to factory work in the mid-nineteenth century may have been de-skilling, or at least not biased in favor of skilled workers. 7 They used detailed plant-level data from 1850 to 1880 and found that the advent of the factory likely led to an increased division of labor so that teams of unskilled workers could perform tasks previously done by a handful of skilled workers. Late in the period, as steam power predominated, there may have been an increase in the use of skilled labor which partially offset the bias in favor of unskilled workers. Bessen's (2011) study of New England textile factories found evidence that new technologies simultaneously eradicated the need for certain tasks while increasing the value of the remaining tasks used in production. Autor et al. (2003) used a post-1960 U.S. dataset on the tasks required of occupations to investigate the skill content of computerization. They found that demand for non-routine tasks increased while demand for routine-cognitive and routine-manual skills fell, suggesting that computers are complementary to the former but substitute for the latter. This skill bias explains a substantial part of the increase in inequality for that period, and dwarfs the contribution of other causes, including the growth of trade and outsourcing and the decline of unions. 8 The results of this paper show that technological change up to 1940 exhibited characteristics of both of these episodes, the unskill-biased component and the hollowing out effect.

## 2. Electrification

Fig. 1 shows that steam power was dominant through the 1900s but by 1910 electricity was catching up rapidly, overtaking steam sometime in the 1910s, spurred by the

Fig. 1. National electricity adoption in manufacturing: 1900 -1940.

<!-- image -->

halving of electricity prices from 1909 to 1929. 9 What effect did this dramatic shift in power have on workers? Through historical documentation on engineering advances one can trace the key changes in the character of the American factory following electrification. The most fundamental shift involved the removal of the steam engine and the overhead belts which delivered power from engines to machines. This led to a decrease in demand for maintenance workers and for unskilled materials handlers who were now replaced by overhead cranes operated by higher skilled workers. The indirect effects due to the introduction of complementary technologies are less obvious. Devine (1985, p. 46) argued that ' electrification and plant reorganization often went hand-in-hand . With ' steam power, the main aim in factory design was to minimize the inefficiencies of engines by placing energyintensive machines closest to the steam engine and grouping machines of the same type together. Electricity facilitated the move to straight-line production, which contributed to the huge productivity gains identified during this period. 10 These indirect savings were hailed as much bigger than the energy savings:

' There were many factories which introduced electric power because we engaged to save from 20 to 60% of their coal bills; but … those who /uniFB01 rst introduced electric power on this basis found that they were making other savings than those that had been promised. ' (Crocker, 1901, p. 9).

Some portion of the indirect savings was likely due to more efficient use of labor, a possibility supported by the historical literature. Most of the evidence relates to the factory floor. An early reference, from the 1900 census, stated that ' A factor that has had a real tendency to lower the actual earnings of the wage earner in many industries is the displacement of the skilled operator by machinery which permits the substitution of a comparatively unskilled machine hand . ' 11 Later examples also abound. For instance, Hounshell's survey of the innovations made by Ford Motor Company from 1900 to 1920 states that the company's new factories and machines were designed for simplicity, so that all machinery could be tended by unskilled workers (Hounshell, 1984, p. 230). Perhaps most importantly, the availability of electricity led to the introduction of the assembly line, a significant contributor

to job routinization (Schurr et al., 1990, p. 291). An early study of the effects of mechanization by Jerome (1934) focused on the labor market effects of new technology. In all, 842 labor saving technologies were analyzed and it was found that 536 involved the replacement of hand methods with mechanical processes, 259 involved improvements in power equipment, and 47 replaced horse-powered equipment with generating power. Most of the displacement of hand methods was in the unskilled handling sector 12 while the increased complexity of goods caused an increase in skilled and supervisory staff (Jerome, 1934, pp. 46, 65). These case studies suggest that there was no general rule as to the direction of technological change in this period. Within the glass industry, for example, skilled labor was displaced in bottle and window manufacturing, while the reverse was true in plate glass (Jerome, 1934, p. 97). Another example comes from Ford's introduction of the assembly line in 1913 for production of its fly-wheel magnetos (used to start engines), which turned a one-man job into a 29-man operation, reducing materials handling and overall work-time per magneto by 34%. Bright (1958) explains that each man on the assembly line performed simpler tasks and required less training than the original workman (though tasks such as inspection, assembly and machine repair were more difficult to automate or replace). Thus, the newly electrified factory was characterized by assembly line production which remained a labor-intensive process and where speed and accuracy were valued highly enough to prevent total displacement of skilled workers. 13

In summation, the literature indicates systematic replacement of craft skills together with the replacement of some manual functions (but not those involving assembly). To provide some preliminary evidence that these changes were complementary to electricity, I used data from Jerome (1934) to calculate the correlation between the share of output produced using new technology and horsepower per worker for 4 industries. These correlations are positive and large (iron and steel -.95; printing -.73; cigar manufacture -.95; machine tools -.41).

Moving beyond the factory floor, Nye argues that ' industrial managers used electricity to maximize economies of scale by constructing large, continuous-process manufacturing plants ' (Nye, 1990, p. 209). Electrification may have promoted the use of scientific management

because it encouraged plant consolidation and made production faster so that a variety of tasks had to be completed simultaneously in order to create final products of the desired quality. 14 Thus, more clerical and managerial staff was hired to supervise and record timekeeping, monitoring orders as they progressed in production. The range of predictions presented here shows that the overall effect of electrification on relative labor demand is an empirical question.

## 3. Model of task demand

Motivated by the discussion in Section 2, this section presents a model of labor demand in manufacturing which provides the structure for the empirical specification used below. All variables vary by state, s, and year, t, but subscripts in Eqs. (1) and (2) are omitted for clarity. There is one final good, Y , whose price is normalized to 1. Production workers ( P ) and clerical workers ( C ) combine to produce Y . B is a technology parameter and θ is the elasticity of substitution between worker types. All workers perform a range of tasks but C workers perform more clerical and managerial tasks and to a higher level than P workers. Cobb -Douglas is the appropriate function to model this, given that the share of each type, production and non-production workers, in employment is roughly constant over the period.

$$Y ¼ BP C θ 1 -θ : ð 1 Þ$$

Production workers are made up of two types: Manual workers perform more manual tasks ( M ), involving physical strength and Dexterity workers specialize in dexterity tasks ( D ). Dexterity tasks require a high level of hand -eye and motor coordination. Placing this in the context of early twentieth-century manufacturing, C workers may be thought of as the white collar factory employees who were engaged in record-keeping and supervisory duties while the other types, D and M may be thought of as the blue-collar factory employees who were directly involved in goods production. Since the true relationship between dexterity and manual tasks is unknown, P is modeled as a CES combination of these two worker types:

$$P ¼ AM M σ -1 σ þ AD D σ -1 σ h i σ σ -1 ð 2 Þ$$

where AM and AD are technology parameters and σ is the

elasticity of substitution between the two types. Firms choose combinations of workers in order to maximize profits which, along with perfectly competitive markets, produce the relative labor demand equations:

$$ln D M /C18 /C19 st ¼ σ ln wM wD /C18 /C19 st þ σ ln AD AM /C18 /C19 st ð 3 Þ$$

$$ln C D /C18 /C19 st ¼ ln w D σ w C 1 θ 0 @ 1 A st þ ln B 1 θ A D σ ! K ð 4 Þ$$

where wM is the wage of manual workers, wD the wage of dexterity workers, wC the wage of clerical workers and K is a composite of terms which do not vary by state or year and thus will disappear in the regressions below. While Eq. (4) is made more complicated by the use of a nested CES function, these labor demand equations suggest that equilibrium relative task employment is determined by relative wages and the relative task productivities.

Eqs. (3) and (4) can be adapted further to motivate the empirical analysis. It is assumed that electrification will have some effect on the relative productivities of

$$the tasks, AD AM and B θ A D σ . A measure of electrification$$

will proxy for the relative productivity terms in the regressions below. The measure chosen is the fraction of total manufacturing horsepower that comes from electricity and it should closely represent the timing of the switch from steam to electric power and the changing relative productivities of tasks that resulted from that switch, rather than simply reflecting the increased importance of energy as an input in manufacturing. The empirical strategy is thus to look at the effect of electricity-induced relative productivity changes on changes in relative task employment.

/C16 /C17 1 /C18 /C19

It is assumed that labor is supplied perfectly elastically across states so that relative wages are equalized across them. 15 In other words, the relative wage terms, w M /C3 w D /C3 /C16 /C17 t

and w D /C3 σ w C /C3 1 θ ! will vary over time only and this effect will be

captured by the time fixed effects in the regressions below. This assumption appears strong, but is likely reasonable in the context of this paper which uses census data, reflecting the long run equilibrium across states and over time. Furthermore, an analysis of the coefficients of variation across states of real occupational wages using 1940 census data yields values of less than 0.5 in over

80% of cells and in only 0.5% of cells is the value greater than 1. 16 In fact at the 90% percentile of the distribution, the coefficient of variation is .58. While the optimal data to analyze would be the variation in changes in wages over time, the above is suggestive that the assumption is reasonable. Furthermore, the presence of a wage effect would bias the results in this paper towards zero. Finally, the empirical section below discusses the inclusion of region and region-time fixed effects which might capture such a wage effect and which do not remove the main effects of the paper. These assumptions give the following estimating equations:

$$ln D M /C18 /C19 st ¼ σ ln w M /C3 w D /C3 /C18 /C19 t þ σ ln AD AM electricity ð Þ /C18 /C19 st ð 5 Þ$$

$$ln C D /C18 /C19 st ¼ ln w P /C3 σ w C /C3 1 θ 0 @ 1 A t þ ln B 1 θ A D σ electricity ð Þ ! st : ð 6 Þ$$

More generally, the relative productivity terms might be a function of physical capital and there may be labor supply shocks that influence the dependent variables, such as the increased educational attainment due to the high school revolution during this period. These will be controlled for in various specifications presented below.

## 4. Data

To examine the effects of electrification, I combine several data sources on electricity, individual characteristics and the tasks required of each occupation. This section describes each source. The data cover the entire U.S. but are limited to the manufacturing sector.

## 4.1. Task data

The task data come from a 1956 publication of the United States Employment Service that was originally constructed to facilitate the matching of unemployed workers to available jobs during the Great Depression, as mandated by the 1933 Wagner -Peyser Act. It contains task ratings for 4000 jobs which were digitized for the first time for this project. Full descriptions of the occupations are listed in the second edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (henceforth DOT),

from 1949. 17 A task is a feature of a job and details the extent to which a particular skill or activity is used within an occupation. For example, the ' manual ' variable describes, on a scale of 1 to 5 where 5 is the highest, the level of physical strength needed in an occupation. The ' clerical ' variable measures the amount of clerical competency required to perform an occupation. Stenographers score low on the manual variable and receive the second highest score in the clerical variable, lower than an occupation such as proofreader where clerical accuracy is even more paramount. In contrast, machinists rate very low in clerical accuracy. Some variables are dichotomous, such as ' dealingwithpeople , ' which indicates whether a key feature of a job is dealing with clients or colleagues. 18

The task publication contains the original manual given to job experts (people with field experience in factories and workplaces) who constructed the task data based on their reading of the job descriptions in the second edition of the DOT and given the guideline examples listed in the manual. One analyst never rated a job on more than two tasks. Several studies have confirmed the integrity of this task dataset. Trattner et al. (1955) compared ratings based on factory visits with those based on a reading of the DOT descriptions, and found little difference. The U.S. Employment Service conducted its own survey to assess whether or not there were substantial analyst effects in the data and found that ratings were consistent across analysts. 19 Overall, the data are likely to accurately reflect the task content of jobs from 1933 to 1949. One caveat is that the data come from the end of the sample period and so may not be perfectly representative of the task content of jobs in 1900. However, I compared the definitions listed in the DOT to those given in an earlier description of jobs from the U.S. Army (Swan, 1918) and little change in the task content within occupations was identified. The comparison showed that the conclusions of this paper might, if anything, be biased downward because the changes within occupations that I identified from 1918 to 1949 mostly involved moving from hand methods to mechanization. Thus the drop in dexterity use is under-estimated by leaving out this within occupation change. There are now other precedents in the historical literature for applying twentieth-century DOT data to

earlier datasets. Van Leeuwen and Maas (2011) present HISCLASS, a database of occupational descriptions augmented by the 1965 DOT. Furthermore, Michaels et al. (2013) apply task definitions from the 1991 and 1939 editions of DOT to the period 1880 -2000.

In line with the model, I constructed proxies for 3 types of tasks -manual, dexterity and clerical. This choice is also supported by the fact that most workers in the sample are production workers, working with their hands, which involves dexterity and raw strength, while non-production workers are specialized in white collar tasks. Manual tasks are proxied with the strength task intensity measure. Dexterity tasks are represented using a simple average of 4 DOT task measures: finger dexterity, manual dexterity, eye -hand -foot coordination and motor coordination. Clerical tasks are usually represented by an average of clerical and numerical accuracy, but in some specifications a ' managerial ' variable is used, which includes measures of the extent to which a job involves supervising a project or dealing with people.

## 4.2. Individual characteristics

The Censuses of Population from 1900 to 1940 provide information about workers' age, gender, race, state of birth, literacy status and the occupation and industry in which they worked. 20 The sample was limited to those aged 12 -70 (the results below are robust to using ages 16 -64) who reported an occupation and were not in school, institutionalized or in the military. Finally, 11 occupations for which a satisfactory match could not be found in the task data were dropped. 21 I note that, due to power data being limited to the manufacturing sector, the sample contains only workers in that sector, who comprised 32% of total labor in 1920.

## 4.3. Power data

Absent state -year information on electricity prices, the Censuses of Manufactures from 1900 to 1940 (Bureau of the Census (1904, 1913, 1923a, 1923b, 1933 and 1942)) provide information about the quantity and sources of power used in manufacturing. The main electrification variable is the share of total horsepower used in a state -year that comes from electricity. This variable captures the switch from steam to electricity better than other measures, such as electric horsepower per worker, which might be more influenced by the

changing scale of production. The source provides information on the capital stock in each state -year, which will be included as a control in some specifications, deflated by a Bureau of Labor Statistics wholesale price index for 1890 -1951. 22 There is an issue with the comparability of these data over time as firms making $500 -$5000 worth of goods were excluded from post-1920 censuses. However, the Bureau of the Census claims that the omitted firms were too small to affect the overall statistics, so I assume full comparability. 23

## 4.4. Final dataset

The power data was merged to the census data by state and year, while the task data was incorporated by matching occupations and industries from the DOT dataset with those defined in the population census. Appendix A describes fully this matching process. The task variables were then ' cleaned ' of variation due to changes in the demographic composition of the population over time. 24 This is needed because changing demographics may have affected relative task supply and could also be correlated with electrification at the state -year level, which would bias the results. To do this, regressions were run for each year in which the dependent variable was one of the task measures and the independent variables were age, age squared (to capture experience), race, gender and literacy. 25 These regressions yielded reasonable results -for example, they showed a large positive association between female and literate workers and clerical tasks and a large negative association for the same with manual tasks, while black workers tend to be highly associated with manual tasks. The residuals from these regressions were then used as the final task variables, to form the dependent variables in the regressions. Goldin and Katz (1998) used a similar process to remove variation in their high school share variable driven purely by geography or demographics. Finally, since the tasks are measured on different scales I normalize each variable to a (0,1) spectrum by ordering occupations according to the task scores in the 1900 census and assigning them a new score based on their position on the spectrum. Thus, an

occupation with a task value of 0.34 indicates that 34% of the workforce in 1900 worked in an occupation which was equally or less intensive in that task. The other years of data received scores according to this distribution so that changes are measured relative to 1900.

The final dataset contains observations on 411,530 individuals who worked in manufacturing from 1900 to 1940, yielding 251 observations when aggregated to the state -year level.

## 5. Empirical analysis

This section presents summary statistics for the variables of interest, outlines the empirical strategy used to identify the labor market effects of electrification and presents the results of weighted OLS estimations. Finally, some robustness checks are discussed.

## 5.1. Summary statistics

Fig. 2 shows the substantial variation in the use of electricity across states from 1900 to 1940. 26 Variation in the rate of diffusion was the result of several factors including: hydro-electric power potential, which had a lower marginal cost than thermal power creation; the availability of subsidized municipal power; and the population level and density, which affected the ability of power companies to spread the high fixed costs over a larger number of customers.

Table 2 presents the task scores for a variety of occupations, and also shows one of the main task ratios of interest, that of clerical skills to manual skills. The empirical analysis presented below will use data aggregated to the state -year level due to the nature of the electricity data, but it is useful firstly to show that the underlying task data are reasonable and, broadly speaking, the ordering of occupations is as would be expected. Occupations such as cashiers, who regularly deal with money and numbers, and draftsmen, who make mechanical drawings using mathematical knowledge rate more highly on the numerical and clerical tasks than do jobs like firemen and brakemen, which are extremely heavy, physical occupations. Table 3 presents a similarly plausible ranking of occupations according to their relative dexterity/manual task intensity.

## Electrification Rates by State &amp; Year, 1900-1940

Fig. 2. Electrification rates by state &amp; year, 1900 -1940.

<!-- image -->

Notes: Data are from the Censuses of

Manufactures for each census year.

Electrification is measured as % of total

horsepower that comes from electricity.

## 5.2. Empirical strategy

The specification follows Eqs. (5) and (6) weighted by the total census weights for each state -year 27 :

$$ln R st ¼ c þ τ 1 Elecrate st þ α t þ β s þ ∈ st ð 7 Þ$$

where α and β are year (t) and state (s) fixed effects which capture common variation in relative wages and state-specific technologies respectively. Elecrate , the proportion of total horsepower in each state -year that comes from electricity, is the main variable of interest and was chosen over alternatives such as a log of total electricity used because it takes into account that total power used in manufacturing rose substantially during the sample period and so this represents a more accurate

Table 3 Task content of representative occupations: dexterity/manual.

| Variable name                       | Variable description                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Numerical                           | Ability to perform arithmetic operations                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Clerical                            | quickly and accurately. Ability to perceive pertinent detail in verbal or tabular material, to observe differences in copy, to proofread words and numbers and to avoid perceptual errors in arithmetic computation. |
| Dexterity                           | Average of: hand &amp; finger dexterity, manual dexterity of the hands and hand - eye coordination.                                                                                                                      |
| Manual                              | Degree to which strength is used in the occupation.                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Dealingwithpeople                   | Dummy variable describing whether or not an important feature of the job is dealing with people.                                                                                                                     |
| Direction, Control &amp; Planning (DCP) | Dummy variable describing whether or not an important feature of the job is to direct, control and plan an entire activity or those of others.                                                                       |

Notes: These definitions are based on those given in the Estimates of Worker Traits for 4 000 Jobs , (1956) manual for job rating experts.

measure of electrification as opposed to a general energy increase. On the left hand side, R st reflects a variety of task variable ratios, which vary across

Table 2 Task content of representative occupations: clerical/manual.

| Occupation                             |   Clerical skills |   Manual skills |   Clerical/ manual |   Clerical/ manual percentile |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------|-----------------|--------------------|-------------------------------|
| Janitors/sextons                       |              0    |            0.78 |               0    |                           0   |
| Porters                                |              0.28 |            0.93 |               0.3  |                           0.1 |
| Meat cutters, except slaughter/packing |              0.53 |            0.94 |               0.57 |                           0.2 |
| Forgemen/hammermen                     |              0.72 |            0.94 |               0.77 |                           0.3 |
| Stone cutters &amp; carvers                |              0.78 |            0.91 |               0.85 |                           0.4 |
| Carpenters                             |              0.78 |            0.8  |               0.99 |                           0.5 |
| Stationary engineers                   |              0.98 |            0.78 |               1.26 |                           0.6 |
| Guards, watchmen &amp; doorkeepers         |              0.54 |            0.38 |               1.42 |                           0.7 |
| Compositors &amp; typesetters              |              0.8  |            0.37 |               2.16 |                           0.8 |
| Bookkeepers                            |              0.56 |            0.07 |               8.05 |                           0.9 |
| Managers, officials &amp; proprietors      |              0.75 |            0.08 |               9.38 |                           1   |

Notes: Figures are based on the author's calculations from the 1900 population census distribution of occupations. The occupations presented were chosen because they represent each decile of the clerical/manual distribution. Clerical is an average of numerical and clerical skills. Manual is the degree of strength required of a job. All variables in columns 1 and 2 are shown on the (0,1) scale, as explained in the text. Column 3 shows the ratio of clerical to manual skills and column 4 highlights which decile of the occupational distribution is being represented.

Table 1 Description of task variables used.

| Occupation                   |   Dexterity skills |   Manual skills |   Dexterity/ manual |   Dexterity/ manual percentile |
|------------------------------|--------------------|-----------------|---------------------|--------------------------------|
| Plumbers &amp; pipe fitters      |               0.01 |            0.94 |                0.01 |                            0   |
| Cranemen, derrickmen, etc    |               0.04 |            0.66 |                0.06 |                            0.1 |
| Locomotive engineers         |               0.07 |            0.4  |                0.18 |                            0.2 |
| Filers, grinders &amp; polishers |               0.17 |            0.52 |                0.36 |                            0.3 |
| Molders, metal               |               0.49 |            0.87 |                0.57 |                            0.4 |
| Sawyers                      |               0.76 |            0.78 |                0.97 |                            0.5 |
| Heaters, metal               |               0.84 |            0.78 |                1.08 |                            0.6 |
| Dyers                        |               0.94 |            0.48 |                1.97 |                            0.7 |
| Engravers                    |               0.61 |            0.34 |                2.96 |                            0.8 |
| Designers                    |               0.49 |            0.12 |                6.03 |                            0.9 |
| Jewelers, watchmakers, etc   |               0.88 |            0.14 |                6.29 |                            1   |

Notes: Figures are based on the author's calculations from the 1900 population census distribution of occupations. The occupations presented were chosen because they represent each decile of the dexterity/ manual distribution. Dexterity is an average of 4 dexterity measures -hand -eye -foot coordination, hand dexterity, finger dexterity and motor coordination. Manual is the degree of strength required of a job. All variables in columns 1 and 2 are shown on the (0,1) scale, as explained in the text. Column 3 shows the ratio of dexterity to manual skills and column 4 highlights which decile of the occupational distribution is being represented.

state -years, to identify the effect of electrification on the relative demand for each type of labor. The following task ratios were analyzed: dexterity manual / ; clerical dexterity / ; clerical / ( manual + dexterity ); and ( managerial + clerical ) / ( manual + dexterity ), where clerical is an average of numerical and clerical tasks, manual measures the level of strength needed in a job, dexterity is a measure of how much physical manipulation is needed in an occupation and managerial is a combination of the planning, supervising and dealing with people task measures. Each R st variable is the log of the ratio of the mean values of the task variables in each state -year. Since the same task data are used for each year there is no within-occupation variation and thus the results are driven by occupational shifts that occurred within states over time.

Extended specifications were developed which include controls for other factors that may have influenced relative task employment, namely capital per worker and the education level of the labor force. Eq. (7) can be rewritten as:

$$ln R st ¼ c þ τ 1 Elecrate st þ τ 2 Caplab st þ τ 3 EducProxy st þ α t þ β s þ ∈ st ð 8 Þ$$

where Caplab is a logged, price-adjusted measure of capital per worker; and EducProxy is a constructed

measure of average years of education by state and year. Caplab controls for the fact that capital may be more complementary to a particular type of labor, thus affecting relative labor demand, and EducProxy controls for the changes in educational attainment which may have affected relative task supply.

A proxy was needed for education because, prior to 1940, the census provided no information on this. However, data is available on school enrolments for state, sex and race cells for each census year, and was obtained annually through interpolation. Following Margo (1986), this information was used to construct a probabilistic

$$20$$

$$measure of education, according to the formula X j ¼ 5 p j ð Þ$$

where p j ( ) is the enrolment rate for that cell at each age j . This was implemented separately for each sex, race, state and year of birth cell, assuming that individuals entered school at age 5 and finished their schooling by age 21. The proxy is reasonable, with known educational leaders such as Iowa consistently ranking first and known educational laggards in the South occupying the lowest positions. In order to maintain the integrity of this measure, the sample was limited to workers aged 20 -40.

## 5.3. Results

Table 4 displays the baseline OLS results. The first 4 columns illustrate that electrification led to a ' hollowing out ' of the labor force, as clerical tasks and manual tasks increased relative to dexterity tasks. This mirrors the more recent polarization of the U.S. labor force associated with computerization. Recalling in Table 3 that occupations that are intensive in dexterity largely consist of skilled blue-collar jobs, the results indicate that demand for skilled blue-collar work decreased relative to demand for workers specialized in pure manual, or low-skill, tasks and in white-collar, clerical tasks. These results are broadly in line with the descriptions of technological change from the historical literature which indicated that, among blue collar workers, the most skilled was often displaced by new technology, but that more clerical and supervisory work was necessitated by the increased speed and volume of production that came with electrification.

It is somewhat difficult to interpret the coefficients in these regressions, but if we take a state such as Illinois, in which the average manufacturing employee (i.e. an individual working in a representative occupation with the state average dexterity manual / task score) in 1880 was a craftsman and apply the predicted task effects from the regressions, then by 1940 that craftsman has become

an operative, i.e. a significantly less-skilled worker. Alternatively, another way to illustrate the magnitude of the result is to take the observed dexterity manual / task ratio in 1920 and compare it to what it would have been had there been no further electrification beyond the 1900 level. The ratio experienced an actual decline between 1900 and 1920 of over 350%, but under the counterfactual of the 1900 electrification level the change would have been an increase of 33%. Using the coefficients from Table 4, I find that electricity is associated with quite a large swing in the relative importance of tasks during this time. In fact, the swings are much stronger than are observed in the raw data, suggesting that other factors such as demographic shifts, increased educational attainment and immigration had an offsetting effect on relative task use in U.S. manufacturing. If these factors had not been in play the hollowing out of skill types would have been much stronger.

Table 4 also presents results using a restricted sample containing only production (or blue collar) workers. Even by 1940 non-production workers made up only 19% of employment in manufacturing in the sample, so the focus on the production sector is warranted. Interestingly, the production sector does show signs of increased relative demand for managerial tasks, indicating that supervision and coordination became more important features of this sector post-electrification. This is also in line with the historical literature. So again, there appears to be a ' hollowing out ' of the labor force even within the factory floor personnel.

These findings are robust to the inclusion of capital per worker and the educational attainment of the labor force as control variables, as shown in Table 5. The lack of data on capital for 1930 and 1940 accounts for the large decrease in the sample size in this specification. The results imply that shocks to task supply as measured by changes in educational attainment and shocks to task demand that occur through changing levels of physical capital are not responsible for the movements in relative task employment. Table 5 also facilitates comparison of the electricity coefficient with the controls included and when using a 1900 -1920 baseline sample. It shows that the hollowing out result is consistent across these different specifications, with the effect being greater in the 1900s and 1910s. This coincides with the period of most rapid adoption of electricity, further supporting the validity of these findings.

Table 4 Baseline OLS results.

|          | Dexterity/manual   | Dexterity/manual   | Clerical/dexterity   | Clerical/dexterity   | Clerical/manual + dexterity   | Clerical/manual + dexterity   | Managerial/manual + dexterity   | Managerial/manual + dexterity   |
|----------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|          | Full sample        | Product. Workers   | Full sample          | Product. Workers     | Full sample                   | Product. Workers              | Full sample                     | Product. Workers                |
| Elecrate | - .23***           | - .22***           | .30***               | .31***               | .18***                        | .20***                        | .18***                          | .19**                           |
|          | (.06)              | (.07)              | (.08)                | (.10)                | (.07)                         | (.08)                         | (.07)                           | (.08)                           |
| State FE | Yes                | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                  | Yes                           | Yes                           | Yes                             | Yes                             |
| Year FE  | Yes                | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                  | Yes                           | Yes                           | Yes                             | Yes                             |
| R 2      | .85                | .86                | .86                  | .84                  | .88                           | .88                           | .91                             | .91                             |
| Obs.     | 250                | 250                | 250                  | 250                  | 250                           | 250                           | 250                             | 250                             |

Notes: The dependent variable is specified in the first row. The explanatory variables are specified in the first column. manual + dexterity is a simple average of the manual and dexterity variables. managerial is an average of the clerical variable, with the dealingwithpeople and direction, control and planning task indicator variables. The method of estimation is Ordinary Least Squares, weighted by the person weight variable from IPUMS. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and were clustered at the state level. The full sample contains information on all workers 12 -70, while Product. Workers include only those with factory-floor level occupations *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5 percent level and * denotes significance at the 10 percent level.

Animportant additional issue that needs to be addressed is the extent to which the results are driven by changes in industrial composition over time. Such changes might mainly reflect changes in demand for goods, which may cloud the results that we are attributing to electricity. However, it is also important to note that electricity will itself have altered the industrial composition, by contributing to the growth of the chemical and electrical industries, among others, so even if controlling for industrial composition removes some of the original effects identified this does not imply that the true effect of electricity is denoted by these new results. Regressions were re-run where the left hand side measures had been purged of industry effects in the cleaning stage and where the electricity variable had also been purged

of industrial compositional effects, according to the following formula, where Q ist Q st denotes each industry's share in total employment in a state -year and this is weighted by the industry's electricity intensity:

$$Cleanelec st ¼ Elecrate st -∑ ist Electricity it TotalHP it Q ist Q st : ð 9 Þ$$

The results, presented in Table 6, show that about 70% of the dexterity manual / coefficient is driven by factors other than changes in industrial composition, which is reassuring for the thesis of this paper. The coefficient decreases from -.23 to -.16 using this new specification. The results on hollowing out at the upper end of the distribution are more surprising. The coefficients on

Table 5 Extended OLS results: 1900 -1920.

|          | Dexterity/manual   | Dexterity/manual   | Clerical/dexterity   | Clerical/dexterity   | Clerical/manual + dexterity   | Clerical/manual + dexterity   | Managerial/ manual + dexterity   | Managerial/ manual + dexterity   |
|----------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
|          | Baseline 1900 - 20 | With controls      | Baseline 1900 - 20   | With controls        | Baseline 1900 - 20            | With controls                 | Baseline 1900 - 20               | With controls                    |
| Elecrate | - .27***           | - .18**            | .44***               | .40***               | .30***                        | .31***                        | .27***                           | .30***                           |
|          | (.09)              | (.09)              | (.14)                | (.15)                | (.11)                         | (.12)                         | (.10)                            | (.11)                            |
| Cap/     |                    | .03                |                      | - .15**              |                               | - .13**                       |                                  | - .12*                           |
| lab      |                    | (.06)              |                      | (.07)                |                               | (.06)                         |                                  | (.06)                            |
| Educ     |                    | .04                |                      | - .02                |                               | .01                           |                                  | .02                              |
| Proxy    |                    | (.03)              |                      | (.03)                |                               | (.03)                         |                                  | (.03)                            |
| State FE | Yes                | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                  | Yes                           | Yes                           | Yes                              | Yes                              |
| Year FE  | Yes                | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                  | Yes                           | Yes                           | Yes                              | Yes                              |
| R 2      | .80                | .81                | .89                  | .90                  | .92                           | .93                           | .92                              | .92                              |
| Obs.     | 152                | 152                | 152                  | 152                  | 152                           | 152                           | 152                              | 152                              |

Notes: The dependent variable is specified in the first row. The explanatory variables are specified in the first column. manual + dexterity is a simple average of the manual and dexterity variables. managerial is an average of the clerical variable, with the dealingwithpeople and direction, control and planning task indicator variables. The method of estimation is Ordinary Least Squares, weighted by the person weight variable from IPUMS. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and were clustered at the state level. Both odd and even numbered columns use a 1900 -1920 sample, and even columns included 2 main control variables. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5 percent level and * denotes significance at the 10 percent level.

Table 6 Controlling for industrial composition: 1900 -1940.

|              | Dexterity/manual   | Clerical/dexterity   | Clerical/manual + dexterity   | Manager + clerical/manual + dexterity   |
|--------------|--------------------|----------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Cleanelec    | - .16 ⁎⁎⁎          | .47 ⁎⁎⁎              | .39 ⁎⁎⁎                       | .33 ⁎⁎⁎                                 |
|              | (.06)              | (.14)                | (.13)                         | (.12)                                   |
| State FE     | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                           | Yes                                     |
| Year FE      | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                           | Yes                                     |
| R 2          | .80                | .89                  | .92                           | .92                                     |
| Observations | 245                | 245                  | 245                           | 245                                     |

Notes: The method of estimation is Ordinary Least Squares, weighted by the person weight variable from IPUMS. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and were clustered at the state level. The full sample, 1900 -1940, was used, but is smaller than in Tables 4 and 5 because industrial employment measures could not be found for Hawaii and Alaska. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5 percent level and * denotes significance at the 10 percent level.

Cleanelec are larger than were found in the baseline using Elecrate . This may suggest that changes in industrial composition worked against rising relative demand for clerical workers, but that this effect was more than countered by within industry effects. These results bring the paper more in line with the existing literature on biased technological change which has traditionally focused on within-industry effects.

The OLS results are further supported by the performance of a falsification test. I tested whether the change in electrification from 1900 to 1910 could predict changes in relative task employment from 1870 to 1880 and found no evidence of such a relationship. This lends weight to the ideas presented here that the effects of electricity on relative labor demand were unanticipated to a large extent and thus electricity can be treated as an exogenous variable, to some extent.

Finally, I note that attempts were made to develop an instrumental variable strategy to address any remaining questions concerning the endogeneity of the electricity variable. It proved too difficult to identify a strong and valid instrument, but Appendix B outlines two procedures that were attempted, using variations across states in geography and across state -years in regulatory rules governing electric utilities. Reassuringly, the results do not contradict those presented here in the main paper, but nonetheless a true source of exogenous variation in electricity has yet to be found and so it is difficult to interpret the 2SLS results as valid estimates.

These results represent an update to the literature on historical technological change in the U.S. economy. Specifically, Goldin and Katz (1998) claimed that technological change increased the demand for high skill workers, even on the factory floor. This paper, in contrast, suggests that the increase in education levels among blue-collar workers was mainly a supply-side phenomenon. On the demand side, education was important only as a signal of worker ability and in fact there was significant de-skilling at the factory floor level.

## 5.4. Additional robustness checks

A variety of robustness checks were performed. Outliers were dropped from the sample, including states that were very small and young in the early years of the sample (Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico), states that were early adopters of electricity (California) and unusual regions (the South). Similarly, a variety of specifications were re-run using only electricity that was purchased from an electric utility to construct the electrification rate (earlier specifications used total electricity which includes electric power generated at the factory itself). None of these changes altered the results. 29 Results from regressions using total task employment as the dependent variable instead of mean task intensity also yielded consistent results. Specifications were also run using total horsepower instead of the share of electricity in total horsepower as a check that it is not simply greater power usage that changes the composition of jobs and the coefficients on total horsepower were not significant.

State-specific time trends were added to the basic specifications and the results displayed some loss of precision, as expected, but no great change in coefficient sign and size. This specification uses only variation from sudden changes in electrification rates within states over time and thus this proves that general trends within states are not driving the results.

One concern is that unionization during this period, which increased a lot during the Great Depression, might have had an impact on the tasks used in production. For example, strong high-skilled blue collar unions may have resisted electricity adoption if they had any foresight of the detrimental effect on demand for their labor. To rule this out, I used data obtained from Price Fishback to obtain information on the percentage of non-agricultural workers who were members of a union for the years 1900 to

1930. 30 This was included as a control in the OLS baseline regression and did not alter the coefficients on electricity. Interestingly, unions appear to have had no effect on relative task employment in the United States before 1930 as the UNION coefficient shows up consistently as a precisely estimated zero.

Thus far in the analysis the regressions have been weighted by total employment in each state -year, as proxied by the total number of workers employed (using the census weight value). However, the number of hours worked per individual becomes available in the 1940 census, allowing for a more detailed measure of employment. I therefore combined these data with information on total hours worked per year at the state level collected from the 1910 and 1930 Censuses of Manufactures along with city-level data for 1920 collected by Robert Whaples. 31 No data could be found for 1900 so an interpolation was used, with information on 1880 h worked from Atack and Bateman (1990). The data suggest that hours worked per year decreased by 43% at the national level from 1880 to 1940 such that accounting for this margin of employment change is important. 32 When incorporating hours worked into the regression weights, the coefficient on electrification remains the same in most cases and in some becomes larger, suggesting that the pattern of change in relative hours worked reinforces the effect found using relative numbers of workers.

## 5.5. Further investigation

The previous results showed the basic trends in the skill content of jobs and highlighted the decline in the relative importance of dexterity-intensive jobs. This section addresses whether these changes affected all dexterity workers equally.

Firstly, regressions were run for females and males separately. The results were very strong for males while for females there were few significant results. Women

represented only 24% of the manufacturing labor force by 1940, so the lack of significant results is not surprising given the smaller sample size. To investigate further, regressions were also run using the share of females in the labor force as the dependent variable. This share increased by 12 percentage points from 1880 to 1940 and electrification can explain a 5 percentage point increase. Thus electrification did have an effect on the number of women moving into paid employment, but does not appear to have significantly changed the types of jobs women were doing, which tended to be clerical-intensive. 33 This is in line with Adshade and Keay's (2010) analysis of Ohio manufacturing which suggested that technological change during this period was female-biased. This makes sense, given that craft skills were in decline, an occupational category from which women had traditionally been excluded.

Secondly, regressions were run separately for nonwhites. The results suggest that there was little effect on non-white relative performance of clerical tasks, but that there was a much bigger relative decline in dexterity task performance compared to whites. However, it is well documented that there was substantial migration of blacks out of the rural South into Northern manufacturing during the later part of this period. This migration could be driving those results -if blacks were moving into Northern manufacturing jobs and naturally entered the labor force at the bottom of the occupational ladder, in manual jobs, rather than being displaced out of dexterity jobs. There is also evidence that blacks were deliberately kept in lower status occupations. 34 In general, migration across states or from rural to urban areas could be a threat to the identification strategy used above. To examine this issue, the sample was split into white migrants, white non-migrants, non-white migrants and non-white non-migrants and re-ran the typical regressions. I defined migrants as those whose state of current residence was different to their state of birth. The results are shown in Table 7 for white non-migrants and migrants in odd and even numbered columns respectively. The results match those identified above for the full sample, although the coefficients are smaller for migrants, indicating that they may indeed have moved to avoid fluctuations in the labor market and that geographic mobility mitigated the hollowing out

Table 7 OLS results for white migrants and non-migrants: 1900 -1940.

| Dependent variables   | Dexterity/manual   | Dexterity/manual   | Clerical/dexterity   | Clerical/dexterity   |       | Manager + clerical/ manual + dexterity   | Manager + clerical/ manual + dexterity   |
|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
|                       | (1)                | (2)                | (3)                  | (4)                  | (6)   | (7)                                      | (8)                                      |
| Elecrate              | - .19 ⁎⁎⁎          | - .21 ⁎⁎⁎          | .34 ⁎⁎⁎              | .18 ⁎                | .07   | .23 ⁎⁎⁎                                  | .07                                      |
|                       | (.07)              | (.08)              | (.07)                | (.10)                | (.09) | (.08)                                    | (.09)                                    |
| State FE              | Yes                | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                  | Yes   | Yes                                      | Yes                                      |
| Year FE               | Yes                | Yes                | Yes                  | Yes                  | Yes   | Yes                                      | Yes                                      |
| R 2                   | .82                | .82                | .87                  | .80                  | .83   | .90                                      | .87                                      |
|                       |                    |                    |                      |                      | 250   |                                          |                                          |
| Observations          | 241                | 250                | 241                  | 250                  |       | 241                                      | 250                                      |

Notes: The method of estimation is Ordinary Least Squares. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and were clustered at the state level. All regressions were weighted using the person weight variable from IPUMS. The odd numbered columns present results for non-migrants, and the even numbered columns present results for migrants. The sample size differs due to varying numbers of migrants and non-migrants across U.S. states. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level; ** denotes significance at the 5 percent level and * denotes significance at the 10 percent level.

effect. However, there are no significant results for non-whites, so those are not reported here. Because of the small sample size for this group, it is difficult to definitively say that migration drove the results in this case, but it remains a possibility.

It would be interesting to know what happened to workers who were displaced from their original tasks as a result of technological change. In particular, were these workers moving into other sectors such as transportation and distribution, or the retail and wholesale sectors which grew so strongly during this time? Or, did the workers simply move down the skill ladder within manufacturing and accept manual jobs? A number of surveys were conducted in the 1920s and 1930s which asked workers how their situations had changed following a prior lay-off

(Clague and Couper, 1931; Myers, 1929). The surveys analyzed the fortunes of garment cutters in Chicago and redundant rubber workers in New Haven and Hartford. The general trends show that workers did not find employment in the same occupations or with wages as high as they had enjoyed previously. Many workers moved into jobs such as drivers and truckers which involved less skilled work than they had previously done. Additionally, work on the printing industry by Elizabeth Baker found that displaced workers preferred to try to remain in the same occupation or industry but that, once displaced by technology, it was more difficult to find similar employment. Workers who had planned to become pressmen instead became chauffeurs, salesmen, transport conductors and some became mechanics or

Fig. 3. Sectoral composition of U.S. labor force.

<!-- image -->

carpenters (Baker, 1933, p. 78). Using the IPUMS data, Fig. 3 depicts the sectoral composition of the U.S. labor force for the period of interest. The decline in the agricultural sector stands out, but it is also clear that manufacturing grew somewhat and the retail sector grew steadily, as a share of total employment. To get some idea of whether workers were displaced out of manufacturing or simply moved down the occupational ladder within manufacturing, I ran regressions using the share of the labor force engaged in manufacturing as the dependent variable and electrification as the main explanatory variable. The results show that electrification increased the manufacturing share of total employment, but that this relationship is only significant up to 1920 when adoption was at its most rapid. After 1920, electrification appears to have had an almost zero influence on this share. This may suggest that it became harder over time for displaced workers to stay within the manufacturing sector.

## 6. Conclusion

Technological change in the United States has displayed a remarkably stable effect on the skill distribution from the advent of the factory to the proliferation of the computer. For the early twentieth century, electrification resulted in a hollowing out of the labor force such that high-skill blue-collar tasks declined in relative importance to low-skill manual tasks, while demand increased for clerical and managerial tasks.

These changes in relative employment were driven by a significant increase in the employment of clerical tasks along with a significant decline in the employment of dexterity tasks, while demand for manual tasks remained relatively stable over the period.

The results suggest that general purpose technologies benefit workers with general skills and hurt those who possessed valuable skills that were complementary to the previously dominant technology. The fact that technological change seems to have been so similar in character across these periods lends weight to the interpretation put forward by Goldin and Katz (2008) that increased inequality in the United States in the latter part of the twentieth century was driven more by the slowdown in educational attainment and less by a change in the nature of technological progress. Nonetheless, this paper suggests that there may be room for revision in the view that declines in wage inequality to 1950 were driven mainly by increases in educational attainment. In manufacturing, factory floor production accounted for over 80% of the workforce, and it exhibited a notable unskill-biased technological change in the early twentieth century.

## Acknowledgments

I acknowledge the support of an Economic History Association Dissertation Fellowship and a UC Davis Humanities Research Award. Stanley Lawrence and Erika Zucca provided excellent research assistance. Scott Phillips of the UC Davis Geography Graduate Group provided excellent GIS analysis. This paper has benefitted from the comments of Abhishek Chakravarty, Gregory Clark, Sun Go, Tim Hatton, Ian Keay, Jason Lee, Ian McLean, Giovanni Peri, Ann Stevens, Alan Taylor and Greg Wright as well as participants at the following annual meetings: Western Economic Association 2009, FRESH Belfast 2010, Irish Economics Association 2010, Canadian Economics Association 2010, SOLE 2010, NBER Summer Institute 2010, European Economics Association 2010, EHA 2010, SSHA 2010, the EHES 2011, the All-UC Economic History Group Graduate Workshop 2010 and the TASKS2 Conference Bonn.

## Appendix A. Data construction

Here, I outline how the task data was matched to the population census, and give some examples to illustrate the process. This was done for all occupations within the manufacturing sector. For most observations, I used the census occupation and industrial classifications and found a match for them in the DOT task data, using the occupational definitions listed in the 1949 Dictionary of Occupational Titles . The IPUMS variables used were occ1950 (which classifies the occupation of individuals across census years 1850 -1950) and ind1950 (which does the same for industries). In some cases, more than one DOT could be matched to each census occupation-industry cell. In such cases, I used a third IPUMS variable, occstrng , which reports the exact response given by the census respondent when asked about their occupation. For that occupation-industry cell, I assigned the weighted average of the relevant DOTs, where the weights were constructed according to the responses in occstrng . The examples given below should make clear the procedure. I concorded the data this way in order to achieve as rich a dataset as possible, avoiding aggregating together people who were not doing exactly the same occupation and thus whose task content differed. A small subset of occupations was also matched by sex because they involved distinct male and female jobs. The occupational categories concerned include janitors, maids, and policemen. For a limited range of individuals, the match was by occupation only: these tended to be professional occupations which were invariant by industry, as shown by the examples below.

## Examples

Easy Concordances : Matching task data to census data only by occupation.

Census occupation ' Chemical Engineer ' matched to DOT ' Chemical Engineer, R&amp;D . '

Census occupation ' Librarian Assistant ' matched to DOT ' Librarian Assistant ' .

Difficult Concordances : Matching task data to census data by occupation and industry.

Census occupation ' Machinist ' was matched to different DOTs depending on the census industry: for example, for the motor vehicle industry, the task data for ' Machinist, automobile ' was used; for the photographic equipment industry, ' Machinist, camera ' was used. Most other industries were matched to the task data for ' Machinist , a generic title. For some ' industries the match was more complex, and involved a weighted average of several DOT occupations. For example, the breakdown for the shipbuilding and repairing industry is: 50% ' Machinist, marine-gas engine ' and 50% ' Machinist, outside . So, for this occupation and industry ' cell, 50% of individuals listed an occupation (in the occstrng variable) that more closely matched the DOT description for ' Machinist, marine-gas engine ' and 50% more closely matched the ' Machinist, outside ' description.

Some census occupations were difficult to match to the task data. Compromise solutions were found for the following: apprentice auto mechanics (an average of auto mechanic helper and apprentice automobile upholsterer was used); marshals/constables (see policemen/detectives); sheriffs and bailiffs (see policemen/ detectives); policemen/detectives (only a DOT for an official government employed policeman was lacking so I used industrial policeman/guard instead); statisticians/actuaries (an average of census taker and mathematician was used); barbers (barber apprentice was used). The last three compromises were supported by Swan (1918), which outlined the duties involved in various jobs and listed some alternative jobs with similar tasks. These occupations made up no more than 0.05% of the total sample. No such compromise solution could be found for the following occupations, which were omitted: apprentice mechanics, except auto; conductors, bus and street railway; garage laborers and car washers and greasers; boarding and lodging-house keepers; paperhangers; real estate agents and brokers; postmasters; auctioneers; members of the armed services; managers and superintendents, building; mail carriers; attendants, auto service and parking. This gives a total of eleven occupations omitted from the analysis (since military personnel were dropped anyway), which constituted only

0.06% of the sample. 35 For some individuals in categories such as ' professions, technical and kindred workers not elsewhere classified , no match was found ' because nothing was recorded in occstrng and the category is vague. These were dropped, and made up no more than 0.32% of the sample.

## Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2013.04.002.

## References

Acemoglu, Daron, 1999. Changes in unemployment and wage inequality: an alternative theory and some evidence. American Economic Review 89 (5), 1259 -1278.

Adshade, Marina, Keay, Ian, 2010. Technological change, organizational change, and the employment of women: early twentieth century evidence from the Ohio manufacturing sector. Feminist Economics 16 (1), 129 -157.

Arnold, Horace L., Faurote, Fay L., 1972. Ford Methods and the Ford Shops. Arno Press, New York.

Atack, Jeremy, Bateman, Fred, 1990. How long was the workday in 1880? NBER Working Paper No. 15.

Atack, Jeremy, Bateman, Fred, Margo, Robert A., 2004. Skill intensity and rising wage dispersion in nineteenth-century American manufacturing. Journal of Economic History 64 (1), 172 -192.

Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F., Krueger, Alan B., 1998. Computing inequality: have computers changed the labor market? Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (4), 1169 -1213.

Autor, David H., Levy, Frank, Murnane, Richard J., 2003. The skill content of recent technological change: an empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1279 -1333.

Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F., Kearney, Melissa S., 2006. The polarization of the U.S. labor market. American Economic Review 96 (2), 189 -194.

Baker, Elizabeth F., 1933. Displacement of Men by Machines: Effects of Technological Change in Commercial Printing. Columbia University Press, New York.

Bessen, James, 2011. Was Mechanization De-Skilling? The Origins of Task-Biased Technological Change. Working Paper.

Black, Sandra, Spitz-Oener, Alexandra, 2010. Explaining women's success: technological change and the skill content of women's work. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (1), 187 -194.

Bright, James R., 1958. Automation and Management. Plimpton Press, Boston.

Chandler, Alfred D., 1977. The Visible Hand: the Managerial Revolution in American Business. Belknap Press, Cambridge.

Chin, Aimee, Juhn, Chinhui, Thompson, Peter, 2006. Technical change and the demand for skills during the second industrial revolution: evidence from the Merchant Marine, 1891 -1912. The Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3), 572 -578.

Clague, Ewan, Couper, W.J., 1931. The readjustment of workers displaced by plant shutdowns. Quarterly Journal of Economics 45 (2), 309 -346.

Crocker, F.B., 1901. The electric distribution of power in workshops. Journal of the Franklin Institute 151 (No. 1).

David, Paul A., Wright, Gavin, 2003. General purpose technologies and productivity surges: historical reflections on the future of the ICT revolution. In: David, P.A., Thomas, M. (Eds.), The Economic Future in Historical Perspective. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 135 -166.

Devine, Warren D., 1985. Technological Change and Electrification in the Printing Industry, 1880 -1930. Institute for Energy Analysis, Oak Ridge.

Field, Alexander J., 1980. Industrialization and skill intensity: the case of Massachusetts. Journal of Human Resources 15 (2), 149 -175. Goldin, Claudia, Katz, Lawrence F., 1998. The origins of technologyskill complementarity. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3), 693 -732.

Goldin, Claudia, Katz, Lawrence F., 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology. Belknap, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Hounshell, David A., 1984. From the American System to Mass Production, 1800 -1932: the Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Jerome, Harry, 1934. Mechanization in Industry. NBER No. 27, New York.

- Jovanovic, Boyan, Rousseau, Peter L., 2005. General Purpose Technologies, In: Aghion, Philippe, Durlauf, Steven (Eds.), 1st ed. Handbook of Economic Growth, vol. 1. Elsevier, pp. 1181 -1224 (Ch. 18).

Katz, Lawrence F., Margo, Robert A., 2013. Technical change and the relative demand for skilled labor: the United States in historical perspective. NBER Working Paper No. 18752.

King, Miriam, Ruggles, Steven, Alexander, Trent, Leicach, Donna, Sobek, Matthew, 2009. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 2.0. (Machine-readable database) Minnesota Population Center, Minneapolis, MN (producer and distributor).

Van Leeuwen, Marco H.D., Maas, Ineke, 2011. HISCLASS: A Historical International Social Class Scheme. Leuven University Press, Leuven.

Lindert, Peter H., Williamson, Jeffrey G., 1980. American Inequality: A Macroeconomic History. Academic Press, New York.

Machin, Stephen, van Reenen, John, 1998. Technology and changes in skill structure: evidence from seven OECD countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (4), 1215 -1244.

Margo, Robert A., 1986. Race and human capital: a comment. American Economic Review 76 (5), 1221 -1224.

Michaels, Guy, Rauch, Ferdinand, Redding, Stephen J., 2013. Task specialization in U.S. cities from 1880 -2000. NBER Working Paper No. 18715.

Mitchener, Kris James, McLean, Ian W., 1999. U.S. regional growth and convergence, 1880 -1980. Journal of Economic History 59 (4), 1016 -1042.

Myers, Robert J., 1929. Occupational readjustment of displaced skilled workmen. Journal of Political Economy 37 (4), 473 -489. Nye, David E., 1990. Electrifying America: Social Meanings of a New Technology, 1880 -1940. MIT Press, Cambridge.

- Peri, Giovanni, Sparber, Chad, 2009. Task specialization, immigration and wages. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3), 829 -856.

Schurr, Sam H., Burwell, Calvin C., Devine Jr., Warren D., Sonenblum, Sidney, 1990. Electricity in the American Economy: Agent of Technological Progress. Greenwood Press, New York.

Sundstrom, William A., 1994. The color line: racial norms and discrimination in urban labor markets, 1910 -1950. Journal of Economic History 54 (2), 382 -396.

Sundstrom, William A., 1998. The Great Migration and the Economic Status of African -Americans Since the Great Depression: Puzzles and Paradoxes. Working Paper.

Swan, John J., 1918. Trade Specifications and Index of Professions and Trades in the Army. GPO, Washington, DC.

- Thorp, William L., 1929. Horsepower statistics for manufactures. Journal of the American Statistical Association 24 (168), 376 -385.
- Trattner, Marvin H., Fine, Sidney A., Kubis, Joseph F., 1955. A comparison of worker requirement ratings made by reading job descriptions and by direct job observation. Personnel Psychology 8, 181 -194.
- United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1950. Handbook of Labor Statistics, Bulletin No. 1016. GPO, Washington, DC 118.

United States Bureau of the Census, 1904. Abstract of the Twelfth Census of the United States, 1900. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1913. Thirteenth Census of the United States: Volume VIII, Manufactures, General Report and Analysis. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1923. Fourteenth Census of the United States: Volume IX, Manufactures, 1919. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1923. Abstract of the Fourteenth Census of the United States 1920, Manufactures. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1933. Fifteenth Census of the United States: 1930. Manufactures, Volume I, General Report, Statistics by Subjects. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1942. Sixteenth Census of the United States: 1940. Manufactures, 1939, Volume I. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Employment Service, 1939. Dictionary of Occupational Titles. GPO, Washington, DC.

- United States Employment Service, 1949. Dictionary of Occupational Titles. GPO, Washington, DC.

United States Employment Service, 1956. Estimates of Worker Trait Requirements for 4,000 Jobs as Defined in the Dictionary of Occupational Titles; an Alphabetical Index. GPO, Washington, DC.

Whaples, Robert, 1990. The Shortening of the American Work Week: An Economic and Historical Analysis of its Context, Causes, and Consequences. (PhD Dissertation) University of Pennsylvania.

Whaples, Robert, 1990. Winning the eight-hour day, 1909 -1919. Journal of Economic History 50 (2), 393 -406.

- Woolf, Arthur George, 1980. Energy and Technology in American Manufacturing: 1900 -1929. (PhD Dissertation) University of Wisconsin-Madison.