<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Economic Fluctuations and Some Social Movements Since 1800

Author(s): E. J. Hobsbawm

Source: The Economic History Review , 1952, New Series, Vol. 5, No. 1 (1952), pp. 1-25

Published by: Wiley on behalf of the Economic History Society

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.com/stable/2591305

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: http://www.jstor.com/stable/2591305?seq=1&amp;cid=pdfreference#references\_tab\_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms

<!-- image -->

Economic History Society  and Wiley  are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Economic History Review

## THE ECONOMIC HISTORY REVIEW

SECOND SERIES, VOL. V, No. I I952

## ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS AND SOME SOCIAL MOVEMENTS SINCE I800

BY E. J. HOBSBAWM

I

T | | HIS article deals with the periodic and sudden expansions in the size, strength and activity of social movements, mainly in nineteenth and early twentieth-century Europe.2 The period is, roughly speaking, that in which the economic fluctuations of an industrial and capitalist economy are of decisive importance; the area one in which the structures of society in general, and the labour market in particular, are fairly similar. For this reason such countries as Australasia and the United States have been omitted. The article will deal primarily with the questions why such movements are 'jumpy' and discontinuous, why they occur when they do; and, to a lesser extent, with problems of international co-ordination. Since continuous measurement, however crude, is almost impossible except for such phenomena as strikes and trade-union movements, these will be mainly considered. Similarly, since the material, poor as it is, is much better for Britain-at any rate before the i 890's-than for other countries, British data are mainly used. Even so, a good deal of the discussion must remain speculative.

The most dramatic of sudden expansions of social movements are the great social revolutions of I789-1 I 7; but the pattern of discontinuity is quite general even in less disturbed times and in narrower fields. The graph of the membership of virtually every trade-union movement, for example, looks like a series of sloping steps, or of broad valleys broken by sharp peaks, or a combination of both; very rarely is it a mere rising slope. In Britain the 'jumps' about which we are best informed are those of 1871-3, 1889-9i and 191I-13. Each about doubled the basic strength of the trade-union movement, though even higher peaks were temporarily

- 1 Based on a paper read before the annual meeting of the Economic Hi Society in April 1951.
- 2 For the sake of brevity I shall call these phenomena 'explosions' or 'leaps'.

reached during the explosive periods.' We know too little to measure the size of the earlier explosions-e.g. those of 1833-5, 1838-42, and others,' or those of most continental countries before the 1890's. After that their size varies. The Norwegian unions increased about two and a half times in 1904-6, the Austrian ones about three times, the Hungarian ones rather less than doubled; the Swedish ones rather more than doubled in 1905-7 and so on. The best-known 'explosions', which happen also to be among the most recent, in France and the U.S.A. in 1936-7, show something like a quadrupling and a doubling respectively within the year. Sometimes the discontinuity is seen not in an absolute increase in numbers, but in a sudden change of direction in the membership curve, e.g. in Germany after 1899.3 The sudden and sharp variations in the amount of labour activity--e.g. strikes-as distinct from the membership of organizations are, of course, so well known as to need no proof.

Curves, of course, cannot reveal the whole truth. The characteristic thing about our 'explosions' is that they mark qualitative as well'as quantitative changes. They are, in fact, generally expansions of the movement into new industries, new regions, new classes of the population; they coincide with a clustering of new organizations, and the adoption of new ideas and policies by both new and existing units. Thus the 'explosion' of the early i830's in Britain saw old local craft societies adopt quite new techniques of national co-ordination, and the fusion of socialistcooperative and trade-unionist ideas. That of the 1870's saw the extension of trade unionism to agriculture, the beginning of the labour conquest of

1 G. D. H. Cole, Short History of the British Working-Class Movement (i948), is the most convenient source for British figures, available from the i 86o's. Individual continuous series for certain crafts go back further, but need careful use. For other countries see note 3 below.

This is the shape of a growing movement. Once it is well established, especially once it has won the majority of the people it set out to organize, or a high degree of public recognition, the 'jumpiness' is less evident in membership, though not in activity.

2 For the former, S. and B. Webb, History of Trade Unionism (X894 and subseq. eds.), cap. 3; R. W. Postgate, TheBuilders' History (I 923), caps. 3-4; W. Warburton, History of the Trade Union Organization in the Potteries (I 93 I), caps. 3-5; S. Chapman, The Lancashire Cotton Industry (I904), cap. 9; Trades Union Congress, The Martyrs of Tolpuddle (I934); G. D. H. Cole, 'Attempts at General Union I829-34', Int. Rev. Social History, rv (939); for the latter, the numerous histories of Chartism.

- 3 The most accessible sources: Abstract of Foreign Labour Statistics (from i 899); Labour Gazette (from 1894); 'The Growth of Trade Unions since I9I3', Int. Lab. Rev. (I 922), III, 78 and (I 922), IV, 53; W. Kulemann, Die Gewerkschaftsbewegung (Jena, i900 and later eds.) and the uneven Int. Handbuch d. Gewerkschaftswesens. Useful statistics are available in several secondary works, c.g. for France, G. Lefranc, Hist. d. Mouv. Syndical Franfais (Paris, I937); for Italy, R. Rigola, Storia del Mov. Operaio Ital. (Milan, 1947); for Germany, K. Zwing, Gesch. d. deutschen Freien Gewerkschafien (Jena, 1922); for Belgium, E. Vandervelde, Le Parti Ouvrier Belge (Brussels, 1925); for Sweden, Svenilsson, Wages in Sweden 1860-1932 (London, 1935), u; for Austria, J. Deutsch, Gesch. d. oesterr. Gewerkschaften (Vienna, 1908 and later eds.); for Russia, W. Grinewitsch, Gewerkschaflsbewegung in Russland 190o5-1914 (Berlin, 1927).

formerly weaker areas, like the North-East Coast and South Wales, and the first serious experiments in independent labour representation. That of i889-9o saw not merely regional extensions and the conquest of new industries and types of labour, but changes in the techniques of old craft societies, and the impact of socialist ideas on the practical tactics of the movement. If we confine ourselves mainly to studying quantitative variations, it is merely for convenience, because these seem to provide a reasonably useful index of the more complex qualitative ones.

The 'leaps' have attracted remarkably little attention among students. Scholars have recently done some work on the period before i850,1 sometimes without observing clearly that the explanations they offer do not apply to subsequent periods. There is also a fairly ample literature on the correlation of labour movements with the trade cycle, showing that the size and activity of the movements increase at times favourable to bargaining, and slacken at others.2 These, too, are not always aware that their conclusions are not universally, or simply, applicable. With rare exceptions! they fail to get to grips with the problem, for the size of the 'leaps' bears no apparent relation to the size of the cyclical up- or down-swing in which it occurs, at any rate after i85o. i868-73 was admittedly an outsize in booms, but one would hardly claim that the up-swings of i887-90 or 1909-12 in Britain were so much bigger than i880-2, I896-i9oi or 1904-7 as to explain the absence of comparable 'explosions' in those years. It has indeed been argued4 that the great 'leaps' occur after exceptionally severe slumps, which impress workers with the value of organization. However, while this may be a contributory factor in Britain in i889 as in the U.S.A. in 1933-7, it obviously does not apply to the turn of the i86o's, a time of almost universal 'leaps' throughout Europe; to many of the Continental expansions of social movements of i899-1908 o to Britain in 1911-13. No adequate explanation of the phenomenon therefore exists-at any rate after i850. All we know is that they are related in some way to short-term cyclical fluctuations, and probably als to the longer periods of economic change with which most students now operate: the economic expansions of the period up to 1815, from the i840's to the early 1870's, and from the late i890's to the First World War, and the periods of difficulty and crisis which alternate with them.

II

Our first task must be to see what light changes in the livelihood and working conditions of the labouring classes throw on the problem. The most usual indices used by statisticians, those of wages, cost-of-living, and

- 1 C. E. Labrousse, Le Mouv. Ouvrier et les Idies Sociales en France (Paris, n.d.); W. W. Rostow, British Economy of the Nineteenth Century (Oxford, 1948), Pt. I.
- 2 E.g. A. H. Hansen, 'Cycles of Strikes', Amer. Econ. Rev. xI (i92i), 6i6; N. Barou, British Trade Unions (London, 1947), pp. 86-7, App. vi.
- 3 E.g. Horace B. Davis, 'The Theory of Union Growth', Q. journ. Econ. LV (I94-i), 62i ff., 632-3.
- 4 Davis, loc. cit. p. 623.

unemployment, are extremely defective; first, because of our abysmal ignorance of the way in which various classes of the population got their living and how economic fluctuations affected them; second, because of technical drawbacks in the indices themselves which, in any case, were rarely designed for our purpose. The fact that most of them are averages of components whose movement varies greatly, and may even simultaneously go in opposite directions" is not, perhaps, fatal; for the great 'leaps' normally-affect widely differing groups at the same time. Yet it is important to remember that they often obscure such vital distinctions as that between the section of workers who normally lived-in Britain at least-under conditions of full employment, and those who normally lived in a glutted labour market.2 A more serious drawback is this. If a wage or unemployment index is to be used, one must assume that it applies to a regular wage-earning class, employed in a fairly permanent form, and supplying most of its need by cash purchases in a market. The further we recede from i88-1i913, or the further we go from highly proletarianized countries like Britain or Saxony, the less representative do they become. They cannot be applied without the greatest caution to domestic workers, sub-contractors, or other forms of small commodity producers on the way to joining the working-class; or to the large body of casual, floating and irregular labour; or to semi-agricultural labour. Thus for the casual man in the nineteenth century a depression would mean, not an absolute frontier between work and idleness, but merely an increase in the length of the always present- spells between work, a shortening of working spellsa difference in degree rather than kind. For the independent producer or outworker it might not mean unemployment at all, but merely harder work for longer hours in order to make ends meet less adequately. Moreover, we cannot even assu nie that the general state of the labour market was much the same among those to whom trade-union indices did not apply as among those to whom it did. At the very least we must assume a much greater volume of constant, if concealed unemployment than the indices show." Their use is thus dangerous, though it becomes less risky as more workers come to fit into a standard pattern of full-time wage-earners, though on different levels of income and status.

Lastly, we do not possess any usable indices for certain important factors which affect working-class behaviour-for instance, intensity and discomfort of work-and can, at best, improvise a few scattered and partial series.

- 1 See, for example, D. Chadwick, 'On the Rate of Wages in Manchester an Salford and the Manufacturing Districts of Lancashire I839-59'. ,7R. Stat. SoC. xXiiI (i86o), i, which shows that the rates of 6 out of 6 skilled metal craftsmen rose, those of 2 out of 7 semi-skilled grades rose, 3 remained stable and 2 fell; while of 3 unskilled rates i remained stable and 2 fell.
- 2 Cf. the opposition of skilled artisans in favoured trades to the radicalism of the I830'i and I840's (S. and B. Webb, op. cit. (i894 ed.), pp. i8o-i).
- ' It is misleading to deduce from them a baker's dozen of periods of 'virtual full employment' between i8oo and 1914 (Rostow, op. cit. p. 33) or to assume that that term has the same connotation in the nineteenth century as to-day.

III

Armed with such fragile tools, what can we discover about our'explosions'? Very much less after i850 than before, in spite of the increasing abundance of our material. Sometime around the i840's there is an economic watershed, whose nature is only now beginning to attrct attention. Before i850, and in some backward countries after that date also, social movements were greatly affected by catastrophic and simultaneous increases in misery for most of the working-population, which even the sketchiest evidence reveals. Expansions occurred at or near the bottom of slumps. So much may this be taken for granted that Prof. Rostow can construct a legitimate, though somewhat arbitrary' 'index of social tension' for I792-i850 on the assumption that the trough of the slump and a rise in food prices (the two being- normally combined) inevitably indicate maximum unrest. Profs. Labrousse and Ashton have shown why this should be so." Depressions then began in the main in the agrarian sector-most often with bad harvests-and affected the industrial sector through raw material shortages, but chiefly through contracting the main body of home demand, which was rural. Consequently, high unemployment tended to occur at times of famine prices' a situation which almost compelled rioting. We may add that in the absence of unions, and of employment policies which were adopted, if at all, only much later, depressions normally meant extremely drastic wage-cuts for the less skilled factory workers, and very sharp falls in earnings for the vast penumbra of semi-dependent artisans and outworkers.&amp;

This analysis can only be applied to Britain with some reserve. The primacy of the genuine trade cycle here is not in much doubt after 18I5, or perhaps even from the 1780'S, though the 'Labroussian' nature of our export markets no doubt influenced it, and the policy of the agricultural interest up to I846 probably kept food prices fluctuating more sharply than they need have done. Thus we do not find the clear seasonal pattern of the 'pure' unrest of the old type: mounting to a minor peak towards the end of the year, after the immediate effects of the harvest have worn off, and towards a major one in the months just preceding the new one. (See Table I.) Still, dump 'explosion' remains the rule before i850, maintained

- 1 Mainly in France, by Labrousse and others. See J. Fourastii in IXe Congri lIdtionals da Ses Hitiqws (Paris, 1950), i, 203. Professor Ashton has also observed that such phenom as Keynes's 'Gibson Paradox' (A Treatise on Mone, a) not to be valid before the I840's.
- UOp. cit. pp. 124-5. The choice of weights for whet prices seems arbitrary at fSt sight.
- a C. E. Labrousse, La Cnie d l'Economie FraW aiw i la Fx de 'Aniex Rlgin (Paris, i944), Introduction; C. E. Labroune, La Poitique Finarfi et LEon. de ruAnbb n cmdbat (Paris, n.d.), cap. U, 16-24.
- ' Local prics tending to fluctuate quickly and wildly.
- 'But see E. Phelps Brown and S. Hopins 'The Course of Wage Rates in Five Counties', Ofrod Ecom. Papers, N.S. II (June 1950), 234-5, for op tion the widely accepted view that the wage structure has tended to become less fladt.tk

## 6 THE ECONOMIC HISTORY REVIEW

doubtless by contemporary wage-policies, by the narrow zone which separated workers from destitution, even at good times, by rigidities in the system of food distribution and similar factors.

Table I. Seasonality of riots in England and Wales r7o-1i8oo1*

Percentage of disturbed years in which riots occurred

|                                   | January 8 May 33 September 22   |
|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| February 5 5 June 35'5 October 25 |                                 |
|                                   | March I I July 25 November I I  |
|                                   | April 22 August I4 December 3   |

* Riots are recorded in 36 years of the

Part of Year

Table II. Seasonaliqy of unrest in Britain 1&amp;o-185o3

| Year Description (peak months in heavy type)                                                   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1802-3 Trade Unions. Luddism of shear- April to July                                           |
| i8o8 Lancashire weavers' strike June                                                           |
| I811-I2 Nottingham Luddites March; November                                                    |
| 1812 Nottingham Luddites November-December                                                     |
| Lancashire Luddites March-April                                                                |
| i8i6 Luddism and Farm-labourers May-June  I8I7 Blanketeers, Derby and Hudders- Early June      |
| field 'risings'                                                                                |
| I8I8 Lancashire strikes July-August                                                            |
| 1819 Peterloo (Reform agitation) Early summer-August                                           |
| 1826 Luddism April-May                                                                         |
| 1830 Farm-labourers rising October-November                                                    |
| 1830 *Ten Hour Campaigns (North January-March  Country)                                        |
| 1831 *Reform Riots November                                                                    |
| 1832 *Reform Riots May                                                                         |
| '1833 *Ten Hour Campaign January-March                                                         |
| I834 Grand National Consolidated January-April (March?)  Trades Union: most rapid expan-  sion |
| 1837 Anti-Poor Law campaigns January-arly Jun.; November                                       |
| 1838-9 Chartism December-June (May-June)                                                       |
| Chartism: Newport Rising December                                                              |
| 1842 Chartism: general strike August                                                           |
| 1843 Wales: Rebecca Riots May-June                                                             |
| I848 Chartism April-June                                                                       |

Affected by parliamentary time-table.

1 Source: the full, though not exhaustive, chronicle of riots in R. Wearmouth, Methodism and the Common People of the Eighteenth Century (London, 1945). 2 This table includes only the main episodes, and is thus not strictly comparable with Table I. Sources are too numerous to list conveniently.

After 1850 matters changed. The trade cycle won its general victory1857 was perhaps the first world-wide crisis. The bottom of the depression ad the peak of the cost-of-living no longer tended to coincide. Indeed, if anything the opposite was true: the scarcity of x853-5 was the first whic did not produce major unrest in most countries," being offset by the exceptionally full employment of that monumental boom.2 In any case the disappearance of famines and the smoothing of cost-of-living fluctuations in Western Europe in the succeeding two generations, caused the old pattern to lose some of its distinctness.

No equally distinct pattern replaced it. For one thing, a wide variety of countries, each at a different stage of economic development, now came into the orbit of the capitalist economy, and in many of these the old rhythm was still dominant, and it remained important in others with an exceptionally low general level of earnings. The Belgian miners' jacquerie of i886, the great political strikes of the depression years i893 and 1902 are at least as prominent in the social history of that country as the tradeunion expansion of the 1904-7 up-swing.8 (1902, indeed, was a great year for general strikes all over Europe.)' The Italian movements present an almost classic 'depression pattern' until well into the twentieth century; notably in the nation-wide riots of January to May i898, which were set off by an old-fashioned leap in the cost-of-living.' Even the main tradeunion expansion in 190i may have coincided with a dip rather than a rise in the economic curved and the old cost-of-living pattern was still very much alive in igo6.7 In the genesis of the Russian Revolution of 1905 th depression periods-the middle i88o's and the early Igoo's-are more immediately important than the boom expansions of industrial agitation in the later i890's. Nor, of course, did the depression pattern disappear entirely in countries like Britain, after it had lost its primacy. It has been

- 1 For exceptions-Piedmont--see A. Frill, IPartiti Popolari (Florence, I9oo), p. 22.
- s Conversely, depressions have tended to become periods of falling living costs, thus partly counteracting the effect of heavy unemployment. Cf. M. H. Dobb, Sties in tOe Devlpment of Capitalism (London, i946), p. 334.
- I J. Destr6e and E. Vandervelde, Le Socalsme en Belgique (Paris, 1903), Pt. nx, caps. 1, 4, io. Vandervelde, op. cit.
- 'E. Georgi, Thorie u. Praxis d. Geerastreiks (Jera, 1908), pp. 52, 57, 89-for Belgium, Sweden, Trieste, Barcelona; A. J. C. Rueter, Dc Spoorwegstakingen va. 1903 'Leiden, 1935). See also W. H. Crook, The General Strike (Chapel Hill, 193I). For the Russian general strikes of 1902-3, J. Mavor, An Econ. Hist. of Russia (London, 1914), i, Bk. 7, cap. i.
- b N. Colajannij L'Italia nel j898, Tumulti c Readone (Milan, I95I ed.), caps. 3, i I. For a detailed list of riots, Almanaco Socialista for I899.
- c There is evidence both ways in E. Lemonon, L'Italie E&amp;on. et Socialk i86i1912 (Pars, 1913), pp. 159-78. On the trade-union 'explosions' of i901, M. Bettinott4, Vt'Anni di Movimento Operaio Gewvese (Milan, 1932), pp. 54-5, 63, and the admirably full figures in Origini, Vicend a Conquisti dalle Orgamnzzaciona Operawa aderenti alla Camea del Laoro in Milano (Milan, Societi Umanitaria, I909).

7 See the review of A. Boscolo, 'I Moti del I906 in Sardegna', AMovimento Operaio, u (June-July 1950), 9--1O.

observed that franchise campaigns, even after 1850, tended to revive in times of slump, when industrial forms of activity were inadvisable," just as even before I 850 trade-union expansions -had, sometimes without attracting more than local attention, tended to occur in the up-swing of booms, e.g. in 1792, i8i8, i824-5 and i844-6.2 Nevertheless, it remains true that striking 'leaps' increasingly tended to occur, less at the bottom of slumps, and more at times of cyclical upswing, of rising employmen or, a special case of great importance in the twentieth century, of war.

Much might be said about the political implications of these changes, which led to a sort of dispersal of unrest, both between different classes in one country, and between different countries. The history of i848, for instance, might well have been different if the deepest trough of the countries dominated by an industrial rhythm had not occurred some years previously-in x839-42;3 if the old and new rhythms had more nearly coincided over the whole Continent. British history in the I88o's was much affected by the fact that the peaks of the Irish movement-an affair of small sellers and tenants-occurred in the cyclical troughs of i879-8i and i886-7 and not, like those of the British Labour Movement, on the up-swing of I888-9I.4 Again, the observer cannot help noticing the oddly syncopated rhythm of the European trade-union 'leaps' between i889 and I914, notably the habit of the main British stresses (i889-90 and 1911-13) of falling on comparatively less accentuated Continental beats.5 Similar phenomena may be observed in the world-wide trade-union expansions of the second half of the 1930's, which were rather less marked in Britain than in most other countries, including notably, in many British

- 1 The sharp distinction between industrial and political action is, however, artificial, especially on the Continent where permanently weak trade unions habitually relied on political campaigning.
- ' We have only fragmentary and roundabout evidence for those before 1824-5, e.g. in A. Aspinall, The Early English Trade Unions (London, i948), pp. 7, 246-313; Cole and Filson, British Working Class Movements 178&amp;187 (London, 951I), pp. 149-58. For i824-5 see ibid., p. 241; S. and B. Webb, op. cit. pp. 98-i00. For i844-6, Cole and Postgate, The Common Peopk (Lon 1946), pp. 316-17.
- S The other industrialized country, Belgium, seems actually to have been in part untouched by the crisis of early i848. SeeJ. Dhondt, 'La Belgique en i848', Actes du Congris Historique de la Rev. de d848 (Paris, 1948), p. 120.
- 'An earlier, and striking, example of this is to be found in Southern England. In 1830 the farm-labourers' unrest stopped within a few miles of the traditionally riotous textile centres, which were booming. (See the MS. Cobb correspondence, Wilts Arch. and Nat. Hist. Soc. Library, Devizes.) In i839, when physicalforce Chartism dominated the latter (P.R.O. Home Office Papers, H.O. 40/40, 40/48) agrarian unrest in the country, as measured by rick-buring and similar offences, was at its lowest point for the decade (see the annual parliamentary return 'Numbers of Criminal Offenders' from 1834). Between them the areas of unrest in i830 and 1839 cover most of the country, but they hardly overlap.
- 5 The Russian labour revival from J912 and the Belgian general strike of 19 13 are the main Continental exceptions.

colonies and dependencies.' Such changes are reflected in the evolution of the ideas and tactics of those who believed in European or world revolution, from the traditional assumptions of the men of I 848 to the complexities of Lenin's 'law of uneven development'. We should, however, add that the increasing political interdependence of countries, and the unifying force of such things as wars have to some extent counteracted this 'dispersal'.

IV

The new model of 'explosion' is thus not so easy to analyse. Certainly the analysis of the available indices of labour conditions is more complicated, though it does help in settling the problem of the exact timing of the 'leaps'. The most measurable of these, in Britain, occur on the up-swing of trade cycles, but appear to have been hatched in periods when important groups of workers became less well-off.

Real wage figures are too artificial and unreliable to measure this. Fortunately we have some rough, but more realistic, indications in consumption figures for certain staple goods and the pauper returns. This evidence is by no means conclusive, though it does show that, between i867 and i91 I, our pattern fits the three up-swings in which expansions took place, does not fit the two in which they were absent, and may or may not fit that of 1903-7 in which there was no major trade-union activity, but-to judge by the general election of X o6-a marked political 'leap'. Table III2 sets out the data for the three expansions of i871-2, i889-Jo and i9ii-i2. It shows that the rate of adult and able-bodied pauperism failed to fall between the trough of the slump and the peri before the 'explosion', and might even show a tendency to rise. Per co in the periods I88o-4 and 1893-8 there was a fairly steady decline, th not in 1902-7.8 Similarly a stronger tendency to buy less of certain

- 1 H. A. Marquand (ed.), Organised Labour in Four Continents (London, V. Thompson, Labor Problems in Southeast Asia (Yale, I947); K. Kurihara, L in the Philippine Economy (Stanford, i945); S. D. Punekar, Trade Unionism i (Bombay, i948), bring this out.
- 2 Consumption indices are preferable to real-wage ones, in view of the a or the known weaknesses of cost-of-living figures. The table gives both the pauper rates (which are over-weighted by the old and infirm), and those for normally adult and able-bodied, which may be taken as a rough check on the trade-union unemployment rate, from which they diverge quite interestingly. Care should be taken not to use these figures as more than general pointers, or outside their scope. Thus they are not intended to. contribute to the discussion on the movement of real and money wages in cycles (see Dunlop, Keynes, Tarshis and Richardson in Econ. J. xLvm ( 938), 41 2; xUx ( 939), 34, 150, 425; Ruggles, Dunlop, Tarshis in Q.J. Econ. Lv (1940-I), 130, 683, 69i, 697), and they do not in fact clearly support either side in that controversy.
- 8 This whole period, however, sees a generally rising trend of able-bodied pauperism, which may be due to the abnormal depression in London, at its peak in 1905-6. Hence able-bodied pauperism in 1903-7 does not show a mere failure to decline from depression levels-in fact, the slump made hardly any impact on it-but a sharp jump in I905--6.

goods appears before the 'explosions', than in the contain any.

'Ordinarily

Table III. Changes in Working Class Standards Expansions, 1871-2, 1889-go and 1911-

|                   | able-bodied  Consumption Paupers per wooo paupers' per  Changes of population wooo population  Year (a) (b) (c)   |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| I. 1867-72        | I. 1867-72                                                                                                        |
| 1867 1 450 6*9    |                                                                                                                   |
| 1868 3 48 o 7.7   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1869 4 47.7 7.8   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1870 3 48-8 7.9   |                                                                                                                   |
| 187, 4 48-2 7.7   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1872 0 43 ? 6.6   |                                                                                                                   |
| II. i886-9        | II. i886-9                                                                                                        |
| i886 6 29-9 3.7   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1887 2 29-9 3.7   |                                                                                                                   |
| i888 4 290 3.7    |                                                                                                                   |
| 1889 3 27,9 35    |                                                                                                                   |
| III. 1908-11      | III. 1908-11                                                                                                      |
| 1908 5 25 7 3.2   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1909 1 26 I 3T5   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1910 3 25-9 3.6   |                                                                                                                   |
| 1911 I 24-8(d) 35 |                                                                                                                   |

- (a) This series expresses the number of the following eight commodities whose consumption per head fell in the year: Tea, Sugar, Tobacco, Beer, Currants and Raisins, Cocoa, Coffee, Rice. Sources, as used by G. H. Wood, 'Some Statistics Relating to Working Class Progrs, J.R. Stat. Soc. vol. 62 (I889). For I900-II the commodities used by F. Wood, 'The Course of Real Wages in London 1900-12', J.R. Stat. SOC. Vo1. 77 (1913-14), have been used. Since her table includes Meat and Flour, but excludes Rice and Coffee, the series are not comparable. The inclusion of other modit in the earlier series does not change their shape.
- (b) R.C. on Poor Law (Part. Ppers, 19o9, xxxIx, App. p. 117), Local Govt. Board Report (Part. Papers, 1912-13, XXXV, 152). This rate i all paupers, an( thus differs for that excluding the insane and casual whic is so mes given (Parl. Papers. I9I0, un, p. 29).
- (c) Local Government Board Reports.
- (d) From i Jan. I911 persons who had received poor relief since i Jan. I908 became eligible for Old Age Pensions; hence some or all of the decline in the rate (Parl. Papers, 1912-13, DCXV, pp. vii, 105, 117).

Thus it is fairly clear that money was getting tighter for the workingclass household in the later ix86o's. This is borne out by the statistics of the Oddfellows; resignation fiom that Society rose steadily from I864 to 1869 and did not really begin to fall until 1871.1 The increase in pauperism was

- I JOR. Stat. Soc. XL (1877), 42 ff., 'Some statistics of the Affiliated Orders of Friendly Societies'; also F. G. P. Neison, The Manchester Unity of Oddfellows (London, 869).

striking enough to cause a marked tightening o in i869 and 187 1,1 for it was ascribed, on no very obvious evidence, to laxity. The tightest period seems to have been in 1870. The evidence for i886-9 is somewhat less strong, though suggestive enough. The decline in real wages in the years before 19 I is a matter of common knowledge. About the i833-5 outbreak we know hardly anything, since we lack both general consumption and poor law figures. The only commodity for which we have good figures, sugar, dropped from i831 to i833 inclusive, in spite of a decline in the duty. Consumption had risen with two small checks since i826.3 Though wholesale wheat prices were falling, we know that retail prices did not decline in proportion, if they declined at all. The results of an investigation into their change since i814 by the Chartist Convention in i8394 may be summed up in the words of one of the questionnaires: 'While wages have been steadily falling provisions have not. My memory can serve me for i830. The difference if any is trifling on either side. '" The general picture is thus one of wages lagging behind prices in the early stages of these booms, while the decline in unemployment and the expansion of overtime or other elastic forms of earning had not yet offset the rise.

The unemployment situation is more complex. We know hardly anything about the early i830's, except that unemployment among the favoured Ironfounders rose until i833.6 Still, in general it must have declined from the I832 peak, though this may not have affected the men hit by technological changes. In I87I unemployment had been improving for two years or so in the metal industries, and wasjust beginning to improve in building, printing and other less cyclical and more sluggish occupations, which may, however, give a better idea of what happened to unorganized workers.7 In i889 unemployment in the main cyclical industries showed a sharp decline from the great peak of i886, flattening out somewhat in 1888-9 and rising a little in I889-90. The figures of unemployment among builders, printers, cabinet-makers, showed the expected lag in i8878, declined more steeply in i888-9 and flattened out in i889-9o. Some industries, however, which we know to have been greatly affected by the subsequent 'explosion', were heterodox. The boot- and shoemakers had

- 1 Cf. Goschen's Minute of i869 and the Local Government Board's Circular Of 2Dec.- 871.
- 2 It has been argued (Labour Gazette (i9i2), p. 2) that the drought of t summer of i9 I accentuated the rise in the cost of living; but one cannot be su how far this would affect a movement which was at its height in Augus September.
- 3 Parl. Papers, i852-3, xcix: Return of Quantities of Sugar Imported and Retained for Consumption.
- ' B.M. Add. MSS. 34, 245 A and B. The returns represent only a few areas well, notably Scots and West of England textile towns.
- 'Loc. cit. B, p. 284. See also T. S. Ashton, 'The Standard of Living of the English Worldng Class, 1790-i830', Jom. Ecox. Hut. Supp. vx (i949).
- v Woytinsky, Three Sources of Unemployment (Geneva, 1935).
- 7 J.R. Stat. Soc. LXo (i89), 64o-2.

their unemployment peak in i888 and had only just begun their declined The railwaymen and locomotive engineers also had delayed unemployment peaks in i887 and i888. In ?9i!i the rise in ployment is more uniform. Even the builder whose figures of unemployment had been sluggish for a decade, were coming out of heir depression, though there was an odd, and quite untypical, lay-off of 5 %, of them in June, which may be iuterestig.2

Unfortunately, it is difficult to compare this with other countries' experience. The data are scantier and in view of the less industrialized state of other areas, less representative of the classes which join labour movements. Such as they are, they fit fairly well. Thus, consumption figures and general evidence suggest a temporary increase in labour's difficulties at the end of the i86o's and in the early I870's, at any rate in Prussia.' For Saxony, we get the same impression for the late i88o's and i 89o's from somefigures of meat consumption per head;" for all Germany and for some widely separated towns the same seems to apply in igo4-6. How much value is to be put on these and other isolated, and tricky indices7 is another question. It is perhaps worth noting that the first steps in labour organization in Asian countries are widely -ascribed to the lag of wages behind prices in the abnormal booms of war-time, which may be regarded as an extreme instance of what we have been describing.' There is room for much more research in this difficult field.

- J.R. Stat. Soc. LXVII (I904), 58.
- 2 W. H. Beveridge, Unemployment (930 ed.), p. 429.
- 3 Unemployment figures are scanty before the I890's, and not much use before the twentieth century. The material for consumption figures is well surveyed in K. Apelt, Die Konsumion d. wichtigrten Kulturltander (Berlin, I899). Wage and price figures are more abundant, but the dangers of manipulating real wage indices should be evident from the discussions of British working-class standards in the first half of the centu.
- 4 Apelt, op. cit. 22 (bread), 95 (coffee); F. Mehring, Gesch. d. Deutchen Sozialdrmokratie (Stuttgart, I898), II, 320-I. But an imp me in living conditions is suggested, without evidence, in J. Schmoele, Die soziae GewerkschaJftn in Deuschland seit d. Erlass d. Sozi"itngesetes Jena, P. 39.
- R. Martin, 'Fleischverbrauch im Kgr. Sachsen', Ztschr. d. Wgi. Statist. Bureaus (i895), pp. 119 ff., 150; 'Stoerungen im deutschen Wirts leben', Schriftn d. VeKeinsf. Sozialpolitik, vol. 109 (1903), 5, 238).
- 'Kosten d. Lebenshaltung in deutschen Grossstaedten', Schriftn d. V Sot. Pot- vol. 145 (1914), i 93 (Halle)-, 211 (Leipzig), 145, us 58 (Ba 145, rv, 49 (Ch tz), 384 (all Germany). The marked agreement between the movement of these series is notable.
- 7 Important rises in the cost of living in Paris for the end of the i88o's and early I890's are suggested by G. Moreau, Le Syndicalism (Paris, 1925),pp. 312 ff and C. Tyszka, Lochne u. Lebeiukosten in Westeuropa im r9. Jh. (Lipzig, 1914), p No useful consumption data for French industrial or urban centres are, howev readily available, the Octroi statistics for certain towns (B&amp;littin de Statistiqu Legislation Comparee, annual) being very difficult to use.
- b B. Shiiva Rao, The lndstrial Worke, in India (London, 1939), p. i8i; S Katayarma. T-he I labor Menent inr Japan (Chicago, I9I8), p. 36, for the perio of the China ja pan war, 1836 -7.

Nor is it possible without laborious, and probably vain, researches and calculations, to make any general estimates of the annual changes in intensity and discomfort of work in any European country of our pe That these have an important connexion with 'explosions' is highly probable. There issomegeneralevidenceon this matter' and it is interesting that the periods of 'explosion' are normally among the few in which demands for shorter hours, which, in this periqd, may generally be taken at their face value,2 play a significant part in labour struggles: the Short Time Committees of the early i830's, the Nine Hour Campaign of 1871-2,

Table IV. Intknsit of Effort and Strikes in Nord and Pas de Calais CoalfcldS, 1850-903

| Net increase (decrease) in effort  per head*   | Net increase (decrease) in effort  per head*                   |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                | Years Nord Pas de Calais Remarks                               |
|                                                | 1864-6 + 8-5 - 95 Outbreak in N. z866                          |
|                                                | i870-2 +27 +26-5 ,, bt '872                                    |
|                                                | 1882-4 + 3-5 - 05 " N. 1884 -93  1886- + 0?5 +17 , P.d.C. 1889 |

- * The percentage rise or fall in pr loo workers has been calculated, the first year of each series= i00. Decreases in the H.P. ratio have been added, increases subtracted, from the first figure to make a crude allowance for that part of increased output which is not attributable to extra physical efforts

the Eight Hour Campaign of the late o88o'siand early 189o's spring to mind in this country.' We may also gauge the importance of this factor by comparing the behaviour of groups whose labour had been intensified with those where it had not. Thus Simiand's excellent figures show five major periods of labour activity in the -two northern French coalfields between 1850 and 1902. Table IV shows that the fields in which intensification of labour took place. were those in which labour activity was greatest, up to i893. (The last expansion, 1900-2, took place at a time ofrapid mechanization and falling output per head, and does not fit.)

- 1 L. Dechesne, L'Avinement du Rdgime Syndical dt Verviers (Paris, 1908), pp. 102 ff., on the importance of the struggle against the 'two-loom sytem' inthe genesis of the I906 outbreak. This -is one of the few monographs of a trade-union 'explosion'.
- I These may sometimes be disguised demands for wage-rises through overtim pay. But during the Great Depression in Britain they were often disguis demands for spreading unemployment evenly.
- ' Source: F. Simiand, Le Salaire des Ouvriers des Mines de Charbon en Fran (Paris, 1907), Tableau B (p. II2), pp. 351-5.(
- 'For the Ten Hour Movement) C. Driver, Tor York, 1 passim; the Nine Hour Movement, Jo Burnett, A History of the Engineers' ,Newcastle and Gateshead (Newcastle, i872); R. W. Postgate, op. cit. p the Eight Hour Movement, Trades Union Congress, Reports, 1889-9; and H. Cox, The Eight Hour -Day (London, I89I); J. M. Robertson, Th Hour Movement (London, 1893).

## 14 THE ECONOMIC HISTORT REVIEW

A similar correlation emerges if we compare the effects of the trade-union expansion of 1889-91 in different British railway companies. If we take the rate of non-fatal injuries to railway-men as a rough guide to changes in the intensity of work, we shall find that it rises sharply in three major companies between i886 and 189i, and falls, sometimes steeply, in three others.1 Table V compares the fortune of the main railwaymen's union in the companies concerned :"

Table V. Expansion of membership and branches of Amalgamated Society oj.Railway Servants in two groups of Companies, i888-9g

|                                                                            | Companies whose accident rate   | Companies whose accident rate   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|                                                                            | (I) Rose* (II) Fellt            |                                 |
| I. Number of branches in i888 9! 55                                        |                                 |                                 |
| 2. Number of branches with 14 33                                           |                                 |                                 |
| 3. Number of new branches 6Iz5 29  I 8889i, as per cent of i888            |                                 |                                 |
| 4. Number of new and rising 144 96  branches i888-9 i as per cent  of i888 |                                 |                                 |

- * London and N.W., G. Northern, North Eastern.
- t G. Western, London and S.W., Great Eastern.

However, the difficulties of using partial, often unsuitable and tricky data of this kind are very great. In any case, more work is needed before we can tell how far such changes in effort are functions of cyclical movements-e.g. in depressions, as Simiand suggests,3 functions of the inelasticity of wages, in booms of that of the labour supply-and how far they express long-term factors.4 Nor do we know exactly what importance they have

- 1 Parl. Papers, I 893-4, LXXIX, 'Return of Injuries to Railway Servants'. These figures exclude injuries not caused by the movement of trains, which are not conveniently available until after I896. Nor do they give the proportion Qf injured to those 'exposed to risk', the number of which changes at a different rate from that of all railwaymen. (See the annual Railway Accident Reports.) Similar calculations for later periods are more difficult owing to changes in Ehe methods of reporting accidents in I906, and of both methods of reporting and the classification of workers concerned, in I896. For earlier periods we possess no useful data. Cf. F. G. P. Neison, The Rate of Fatal and Non-Fatal Accidents in and about Mines and on Railways (London, i88o); available in the Library of the Royal Statistical Society. Also by the same, 'Analytical View of Railway Accidents II', J.R. Stat. Soc. xvn (1854), 2i9. The rate of fatal accidents is not useful for our purpose.
- 2 Union figures compiled from the Annual Reports of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, i888-9i.
- a Op. Cit. pp. 242-3.
- 4 See the discussion in H. Verney, 'Orn the recent considerable increase in the numbers of reported accidents in factories', J.R. Stat. Soc. LXXIII (I 91 0), 95. For similar German and Austrian figures showing a secular increase in the industrial accident rate from the i88o's and i890's, see art. 'Unfallstatistik' in early editions of the Hwb. d. Staatswissenschaften.

in the minds of workers compared to other causes of discontent. Meanwhile we can only be uneasily aware of their possible importance in our problem.

V

All this, however, only tells us at what moment in the short term an 'explosion' is most likely to occur. But the crux of the matter is whether the whole labour situation is sufficiently inflammable to ignite. (It is not, of course, necessary that all sections of labour should be at the point of spontaneous ignition, for 'explosions' have great power to propagate themselves, once they begin in one area of industry.)" Not every trade cycle produces such general inflammability. In Britain, after i850, it seems to occur roughly every other decade.3 Longer trends in our indices throw little light on this problem. The 'explosions' of the early T870's and i900's appear in secular boom periods, those of the i83o'\ and tz8o'sI890's in secular depression phases. That of i872 occurs at the. end of a period of probably falling unemployment, rising money and veal wages; that of i889 during one of heavier unemployment, stable money and rising real wages; that of i 9 I while unemployment falls, money wages remain stable and real wages fall. The troubles of the I830's-if one is to hazard a guess about the period-may have coincided with rising unemployment, falling real and money wages. Continental 'explosions' occur against movements which are hardly more uniform.

Clearly the study of isolated series of statistics will carry us no farther. We must consider the 'explosion' as a whole, in relation to the structure of the economy, and the particular phase of economic change in which it occurs. Perhaps the roiost useful assumption is that, under nineteenth- and early twentieth-century conditions, the normal process of industrial development tends to produce explosive situations, i.e. accumulations of inflammable material which only ignite periodically, -as it were under compression. This would appear to be so in all the three main phases of the economy, that of the transition to industrialism, of classical 'free

- 1 The exact methods by which they do so, deserve further study. Th ie general shape of a curve plotting their propagation would, however, seem t resemble that of the spread of epidemics, panics and similar social phenomena (L. S. Penrose, The Objective Study of Crowd Behaviour, 1952). Organizational and political factors would normally prevent the curve from declining in the expected manner.
- ' Attempts to discover more precise periodicities-e.g. a 17-year one in the U.S.A. (Davis, loc. cit. pp. 621-2) are better avoided at present. Nor can any regular relationship between 'explosions' and the phases of economic periods be discerned, though it is tempting to seek them towards the end of each. However, while this would fit quite well-i847-8 for the I817-48 period, i868-73 for the i848-73 one, 1889-93 for the 'Great Depression' and the war-time expansions for 1896-g920-it does not account for mid-term 'explosions' like those of the early 1830's in Britain and i898-i907 on the continent. (Chartism would fit, since it is arguable that in Britain the real secular turning-point came in the early rather than the late i840's.) Since we have only six phases in our period, statistical manipulation cannot help us here.

competition', and of the modern forms of st though each has its own forms of inelasticity, a we may-as in Italy-find curious combinations of all these. For most of

acting factors. In countries which start late on the road to industrialization the nineteenth century analysis is simplified since we have, speaking broadly, to consider only growing economies, and can neglect the major modifications introduced by the latter phases of economic development. Thus active government intervention before 1914 is mainly confined to providing a legal framework for industrial bargaining, to police actions, to relations with their own employees, who are not normally (apart from railwaymen) an important section of the working-class, and to occasional interference in large disputes, and occasional encouraging gestures by administrations of the left like Waldeck Rousseau in France, Zanardelli and Giolitti in Italy, tending to boost incipient expansions of social movements. The formation of huge business combinations in our period does not as yet lead to important joint-monopolies with labour2 but, tilting the bargaining balance sharply in favour of employers, usually intensifies the old-fashioned attitude of management to unions. Serious recognition, institutionalized collective bargaining, etc., are only beginning to develop

This does not mean that our analysis could not be applied, mutatis mutandis, to the later phases. While we should expect each phase ofecono development to have its own patterns of accumulation and ignition, ther is a certain family resemblance between all of them.4 It is uncertain whether we should regard the whole process on the-necessarily crudeanalogy of the ordinary internal combustion engine, whose explosion is ignited by an outside spark, or the more elegant Diesel engine, in which the compression itself produces the explosion. We can find examples of both. In any case, a spark plug is readily available in the trade cycle, or in political events.

Even when all simplifications have been made, the phenomenon remains rather complex. Perhaps the most convenient way to approach it is therefore to take a particular 'explosion' as a starting-point: that of i 889-90 in Britain. Though this is traditionally associated with the London Dock Strike, the organization of the unskilled, and the 'revival of Socialism ',

- I Or, for those who prefer Schumpeterian terms, the three 'Kondratiev waves' which more than cover our period.
- 2 It would take us off the track of the present argument to discuss the interesting exceptions to this statement.
- 3 The Webb MSS. (Coil EA. vi, L.S.E. Library) contains an interesting list of British unions in the early i890's having national, local, shop or no agreements with employers. For the prevalence of local and shop agreements (where any existed), see H. Koeppe, 'Fortschritte d. Arbeitstarifvertrages in Deutschland, Oesterreich, etc.', Jrb. f. Nationaloek. u. Statistik, XLIV (1912), 362; D. Saposs, The Labor Movement in Postwar France (N.Y. I93I), pp. 190 if.
- 4 It may be argued that most social processes follow such a pattern, which may be called 'the transformation of quantity into quality' by some, change 'which so displaces its equilibrium point that the new cannot be reached from the old by infinitesimal steps' by others. (J. A. Schumpeter, Theory of Econ. Development, p. 64 n.)

fact it touched almost all industrial parts of the country, and a wide variety of industries and grades of labour with very varying political affiliations."

We may range the various groups affected by this phenomenon into a sort of spectrum. At one end of it we find those whose 'explosion' was dominated by the trade cycle (in the specific wider setting of the Great Depression), e.g. coal-miners and traditional heavy industries; at the other groups like the gasworkers, almost unaffected by cyclical movements. In fact, most groups were somewhere between these extremes, though the cyclical factors which affected them were not so much sharp periodic jabs of unemployment or wage-cuts in slumps, as more indirect and piecemeal forms of pressure which bore on them, as employers attempted to escape the general tendency of profit-margins to fall. The movements dominated by the cycle began well before the main outbreak-among the miners, in the trough of the selling-price of coal, in the shipyards, just after their most disastrous year, in cotton even earlier.2 They had surprisingly little immediate effect on the rest of the country, which waited for the spark to come from sailors, dockers and gasworkers two years later. Moreover, they continued semi-independently of the main movement, though sometimes, like the miners in the T.U.C., allying with it in pursuit of common demands (i889-93). Of the wider unions among the unskilled, that which had its headquarters in the north-eastern shipyards was the only one not to be under socialist leadership.4

We may note in passing that 'explosiveness' was less, where regular institutions existed which were believed capable of safeguarding the general bargaining position of the men, and their basic minimum of life.

- I No full history of this exists, though there is a mass of valuable contemporary descriptions. Beside the standard works of the Webbs and Cole, see H. L. Smith and V. Nash, The Story of the Dockers' Strike (London, i889), the autobiographies of Tom Mann (5923), W. Thorne (n.d.), Ben Tillett (I931), James Sexton (I 936), G. D. H. Cole, John Burns (i 944)5 E. J. Hobsbawm (ed.), Labour's Point, 1&amp;98o--.zxoo (London, I948), and the same, 'General Labour Unions in Britain i889-i914', Econ. Hist. Rev. 2nd ser. x (948-9), 123. There are van pertinent trade-union histories: R. W. Postgate, op. cit.; R. P. Arnot, The Miners (London, 1948); J. B. Jefferys, The Story of the Engineers (London, I94 R. Groves, Sharpen the Sickle (London, 1949); and, less professionally handled, B. Turner, Short History of the General Union of Textile Workers (Heckmondwike, 1920).; R. B. Suthers, The Story of Natsopa (London, 1929); H. G. Swift, History of Postal Agitation (London, I 900), etc.
- 2 R. P. Arnot, op. cit. cap. in. On the North-East, E. R. Pease, 'Labour Federation', To-Day (June, 1887), pp. 17' ff. and the Reports of the National Labour Federation. No good history of cotton unionism exists. See S. Chapman, op. cit. cap. x, and J. Jewkes and E. M. Gray, Wages and Labour in the Lancashire Cotton Spinning Industry (Manchester, 1935), pp. 82-6.
- 3 For the London impetus, W. Thorne, My Life's Battles (n.d.); Ben Tillett, Memories and Reflexions (I93I); Tom Mann, Memoirs (1923); Smith and Nash, op. cit.; for the northern one, The Life of Sir James Sexton, Agitator, by Himself (1936); J. Havelock Wilson, My Stormy Voyage Through Lift (1925), pp. 134-6, caps. xvi, xviii; The Times, Jan. 28-Feb. I9, I 889.

' E. Hobsbawm, General Labour Unions, p. 126.

Cotton did not explode in the i88o's, but adjusted gradually; wool, which lacked any such machinery-like cotton in the i 820's and i830's-and coal-mining, which suffered under sliding-scales, did 'explode'.1L

We may thus conclude that long-term depression factors (as expressed in cycles within such periods) helped to accumulate inflammable material rather than to set it alight. However, it should be remembered that the direct pressure. of the Great Depression on labour in Britain was rather milder than in the i8i5-47 period, or between the wars. Such pressure was not, of course, confined to secular depression periods. In secular periods of expansion there might be less cause for employers to attack labour conditions directly, but the indirect effects of business policies might be equally serious, e.g. changes in the direction of investment. In so far as such factors-which we need analyse no further here-affect labour conditions and wages, they have already been briefly considered in section IV above.

We may next group our industries differently. At one end of the scale we shall place those which increased their output or activities without any significant technical or organizational change, e.g. the gasworkers; at the other those undergoing rapid technical revolution of the sort most likely to affect workers, e.g. mass-production clothing-manufacture. Since Britain (unlike contemporary Germany or the U.S.A.) was not, on the whole, undergoing any very startling change in technique or business organization, most groups at this period are clustered near the former end of the scale, though some, quite prominent in the explosion-boot-and-shoe workers, tramway-men, electricians, workers in chemicals, flour- and oil-mills, clothing-workers, etc.-are nearer the other. This enables us to distinguish the two main forms in which technical change accumulated tensions.

The first of these is best illustrated by the classically pure case of the gasworkers between their two 'explosions' of i872 and z 889.2 Their industry expanded output at an even rate, almost unaffected by technical innovations, and, except for the secondary by-products market, unaffected by the trade cycle. Moreover, it worked without substantial unused capacity to complicate the picture.' For i6 years it had been virtually free from unions or labour troubles-until the almost universal demand in i889, not for wage-increases, but for a shorter shift-i.e. for

- 1 The main achievements in cotton-the formation of the Card-Room Amalgamation (i886), its admission of ring-spinners (i887), the formation of the Northern Counties Amal. Assoc. of Weavers (i884), and the negotiation of the final Bolton spinning list (i887), all ante-date the expansion. There are only faint signs of 'explosiveness' here in i889-9o, compared with the i830's and 1911-12.
- 2 The main sources for this paragraph are the files of the technical press, notably the Journal of Gas Lighting, and the reports of the numerous conferenc of Gas Managers and Engineers. See also F. Popplewell, 'The Gas Industry', in S. Webb and A. Freeman (eds.), Seasonal Trades (London, 1912).
- 'But since many seasonal gasworkers worked in cyclically sensitive occupations-e.g. bri ng-they must have been affected by it. Hence perhaps
- the timing of ei 'explosion' in x889.
- 4 Journ. Gas L. uv (i889), 683.

a decreased intensity of work. The increase in this intensity may be roughly measured: from i874 to i888 the amount of coal carbonized in London gasworks rose by 76 %, the number of manshifts worked by 48 %;1 though this greatly underrated the 'felt' as distinct from the 'real' intensification of work." But the same process which caused the workers discontent, also made management temporarily much more vulnerable to their pressure. This may also be measured. The industry conceded the demand for an 8-hour instead of a 12-hour shift virtually without a fight (doubtless with a side-glance at the up-and-coming electrical industry), though this was then believed to involve a 33 % increase in the wage-b without any offsetting factors.3 We thus have a very elegant mechanism, which produces its increasing tensions; a spark-plug in the form of a disproportionately great temporary increase in the vulnerability of management, and also, a delaying mechanism. For after each spurt of technical and organizational change both employers and labour adapt themselves to specific forms of relationships which, like all institutions, are fairly inelastic, dams which both help to collect the rising water and prevent it fiom overflowing until it has reached a certain height.

The explosive mechanism is less simple in the ensuing phases of technical change. Perhaps the most important factor making for discontinuous social movements is the tendency of the innovations themselves to cluster; a phenomenon we need not investigate further here.4 Thus round the turn of the i 88o's several groups of workers were simultaneously affected by them-printers, engineers, clothing and boot-and-shoe workers, as well as wholly new groups like electricians. But technical changes normally displace groups both within the industry and outside it, or at any rate shift their bargaining positions, creating discontent by down-grading, the possibility of rapid organization by opening new tactics to others. The 'explosion' of i889 is not perhaps the best for the study of this phenomenon. We do not here find, what was obviously a major factor behind the outbreaks of the i830's-the down-grading of domestic workers and hand-working artisans after their 'golden age' in the revolutionary and Napoleonic period; the collapse of the earnings of handloom weavers, of the local closed shops of craftsmen turning out consumer goods

- 1 Calculated from the annual returns of balance sheets for the Metropolitan Gas Companies (Parl. Pap. I870-I9o,6) and John Field's annual Analysis of Metropolitan and Suburban Gas Company Accounts (from I 869). Since stokers were overwhelmingly paid on a straight time basis, rates did not change, and overtime existed only in the form of extra shifts (cf. Wage Census i906, Parl. Pap., i9i0, Lxxxiv), the amount of carbonizing wages can be used as an index of man-shifts.
- 2 Since almost any changes in heavy labour, which establishes its conventional rhythm, is likely to be regarded as causing discomfort.
- 3 Journ. Gas L. LIV (i889), 458, 838, 885. Indeed, it turned out to be great up to 47 and 53% in London and the suburbs, 35 and 36% in the provinc (Field's Analysis, i888-9i). For the failure to consider the economies of eigh hour shifts before i889, Journ. Gas L. m (i-888), 894.
- ' There has been some discussion of it in connexion with the Schumpeterian system of economic development.

-tailors, furniture makers, perhaps builders; the threat to key industrial craftsmen faced with machines-woolcombers and spinners.1 We do, however, find minor, but not negligible, shifts to the left among several craft groups," and less easily definable unrest among that sensitive group, the semi-independent home-workers and subcontractors on the fringe of consumer-goods industries.3 In any case a change in the productive apparatus involves a change in the superstructure of institutions and policies which rest on it; since these are to some extent rigid, the adjustment is not likely to be smooth or immediate. We shall almost certainly find a period of experimenting, both by employers and workers-and hence of latent or open unrest-before a new pattern of industrial relationships succeeds the old one. The history of industrial relations in the boot-and-shoe industry before the 'settlement' of i895" may illustrate what happens during a period of technical innovation; the history of relations between the Shipping Federation and the seamen's and waterside unions what happens during the transition to an oligopolist structure. Both industries were much affected by the 'explosion' of i889. Mining and textile unionism in most countries follow similar patterns. Yet these by-products of technical change produce explosive material, rather than explosions, though very likely somewhere in the restless mass a spark may be generated.

Yet there are factors, inherent in the rate of industrial growth, and the social structure of the country, which prevent any gradual dissipation of such unrest. Some of these time-lags are familiar to the sociologist and historian. For convenience, we shall here consider only one sort. Industrial expansions in the nineteenth century normally found their labour-force

- ' On the 'golden age', Cole and Filson, op. cit. p. 20, and the consensus of opinion as to the ineffectiveness of Combination Acts against the 'artisans', M. D. George, 'The Combination Laws', Econ. Hist. Rev. VI (I936), 172. On the collapse of strong local bargaining combinations, F. Galton, The Tailoring Trade (i896), p. bxxxi and passim; H. Mayhew, London Labour and the L Poor (i86i-2), HII, 232-41-furniture makers. For wool-combers and spinners, E. C. Tufnell, Character, Objects and Effects of Trades' Unions (i834), pp. 49-6 W. Marcroft, The Marcroft Family (Rochdale, i889); H. Ashworth, An inquiry into the origin, procedure and results of the strike of the operative cotton spinners ... 18 (I838).
- 2 Jefferys, op. cit. pt. iI, cap. 6; D. M. Good, 'Economic and Political Origins of the Labour Party' (M.S. thesis, L.S.E. Library). The small group of skilled crafts which joined in the socialist-led Labour Representation Committee before Taff Vale consists largely of those affected by such changes.
- ' E.g. thedomesticoutworkers in the Bristol and Norwich boot-and-shoe trade. L. Dechesne, op. cit. pp. 3' ff. for similar unrest among thefafonniers in t Belgian woollen trade in the i89o's.
- ' 'Adjustment' is a general and relative term. Some adjustments are more easily made than others, some may not be made at all in the lifetime of a profitmaking economy.
- 6 S. and B. Webb, Industrial Demnocracy (1902 ed.), i85-92, cap. viII; E. Brunner, 'The Origins of Industrial Peace', Oxf. Econ. Papers, N.S. I (June, 1949), 247-60-

" L. H. Pov The Shipping Federation 189o-095o (London, 1950), caps.

(with some exceptions) outside the industrial working-class, e.g. from the villages, or outside regular industrial labour.1 These new recruits were often attracted by the prospect of better earnings, and other incentives, and consequently, for a time, better contented. (They might not be more docile: ex-peasants have their own rhythm of discontent, which is sometimes fiercer than that of established workers.) In any case they were not conditioned to play the industrial game according to its own rules. The process of conditioning them to do so has been studied from the employer's point of view, but less often from that of the labour leader, whom it also serves. The habit of industrial solidarity must be learned, like that of working a regular week; so must the common sense of demanding concessions when conditions are favourable, not when hunger suggests. There is thus a natural time-lag, before new workers become an 'effective' labour movement. Where industries grow up round a sufficiently strong nucleus of 'mature' labour, as during the Second World War in Britain, or where conditions are under direct attack, as in secular depression periods, this will be shorter than when secular boom conditions postpone the urgency of organized demands, or where new centres grow up in the isolation of Le Creusot, or the Silesian mines, or the Quebec backwoods. Helplessness or ignorance may artificially prolong it-for new workers in new industries (or old workers for that matter), disposing only of inadequate old techniques, may simply not know what to do next. Thus in the years before the I 834 outbreak we may see them casting round for new techniques of national or industrial organization with which to cope with problems which baffle the methods of local craft societies.2 The early i900's are full of similar strategic and tactical discussions in several European countries.3 Various factors may precipitate such artificially retarded entrances- of workers into organized labour activity. The news of labour unrest elsewhere, once it penetrates the new area, may set it off. So may political events and stresses, e.g. the French general election of 1936 or the setting up of Congress provincial governments in India in 193 7.4 In most European countries one may suspect that the political and military events of the middle 186o's, followed by the great boom of the early 1870's, are largely responsible for the remarkable simultaneous 'explosions' in so many places.

The mechanism of this may be illustrated by the British railwaymen, prominent in all three expansions between I850 and I914; and differing

- 1 German studies are the most systematic: R. Ehrenberg, Kruppstudien III, 'Fruehzeit d. Kruppschen Arbeiterschaft', Thuenen-Archiv. Ill (1908), I-165, and the 'Auslese und Anpassung' volumes in the Schriften d. V. f Soz. Pol. vols. 133-5, I-IV (1910-12). The skilled tended to come more from artisan backgrounds.
- 2 G. D. H. Cole, Attempts at General Unions, loc. cit.
- a Mainly on industrial versus craft unionism.
- 4 These, of course, are not necessarily independent of the economic roots of labour discontent. Grinewitsch, op. cit. p. 145, gives figures which well bring out this stimulating effect of individual political events on union membership in Russia, Igos-6.

from most other railwaymen not prevented from organizing by law, in being among the last rather than the earliest industrial groups to do so." Outside the skilled footplate and workshop grades most of them were drawn from the villages, or other unorganized groups.2 In addition to the factors already mentioned, the structure of the industry virtually forced an explosive pattern on to them: either they had to organize on an allgrades basis and over a whole network-in itself a difficult task requiring novel techniques-or not at all.3 Yet as soon as they had established themselves, they immediately became centres of labour activity, especially in the country-side, thus helping to propagate the 'explosion' of which they formed part." They leaped, with one bound, from extreme backwardness to one of the leading, and most effective positions in the labour movement.

In practice these various sorts of patterns are combined in every 'explosion': static and expanding industries, technically inert and dynamic ones, short- and long-term cyclical factors, time-lags, etc. Thus the miners' movement was not only an orthodox cyclical wage campaign but, under the slogans of a Minimum Wage and an Eight Hour Day, an attempt to meet long-term pressure on colliers' standards. It was also very concerned about the displacement of established groups, for (as among the seamen) the late I88o's saw an abnormally rapid recruitment of raw labour.5 The railways showed a pattern similar to the gas-work though sharpened by the much less favourable situation of the industry, and its greater vulnerability to fluctuations. The London Docks, as Beatrice Potter7 described them, present an almost classic picture of competition for diminishing profits by an expanding, but technically

- 1 The Locomotive Engineers did not become an effective union until th i89o's. Cf. J. R. Raynes, Engines and Men (Leeds, 1921); N. McKillop, The Lighted Flame (London, 1950). The general body of railwaymen, though active in i87i-2 and i889-9i were not in effective action until after 1907; Cole and Arnot, Trade Unionism on the Railways (London, I917). For the relatively early start of railwaymen in other countries, Rigola, op. cit. p. 228; V. Thompson, op. cit. P. 53, W. Kulemann, op. cit. p. 333; G. Chaumel, Histoire des Cheminots et de leur Syndicats (Paris, i948); H. A. Millis (ed.), How Collective Bargaining Works (N.Y. 1942), p. 323. The reasons for the British anomaly deserve investigation. See P. W. Kingsford, Railway Labour I8 -187o (M.S. thesis, University of London Library).
- 2 E.g. H. Llewellyn-Smith, 'The Influx of Population into East London', in C. Booth, Life and Labour, III, .58-166; R.C. on Housing of the Working Classes. i885, Q Io, 615; Alfred Williams, Life in a Railway Factory (London, i9i6).
- 3 Hence the general interest of railway unions in industrial unionism, general strikes and other novel labour techniques. See the works quoted in note X above, and A. J. C. Rueter, op. cit.
- 4 I am grateful to Dame Florence Hancock for information about this in Wiltshire. See also F. E. Green, A History of the English Agricultural Labourer 187&amp;-1r92 (London, 1920), pp. i i8, 253.
- 5 Arnot, op. cit. p. 112. Statistical Abstract 1875-90, Part. Pap., 1890, uXXVm, 156 for sneae.
- 6 J. Mavor, The Scottish Railway Strike (Edinburgh, i891); J. Mavor in Econ. Journ. 1 (1891), 204.
- 7 In Booth, Life and Labour in London, vol. iv.

stagnant, industry-and hence of increased pressure on the workers. The shipping industry, the other great pioneer of the expansion, had similar problems. Again one notes the increased vulnerability to Labour pressure, which turned the Dock Strike of i889 into so portentous a success: between i878 and i888 the tonnage entered and cleared at the London Docks increased by over 35 %V (the average increase in other ports affec the expansion was much greater)2 while the number of some skilled keymen-lightermen, for instance-actually declined. Piles of explosive material were stacked all over the country, ready for the spark.

One final factor must be briefly mentioned: the part played by bodies of agitators, propagandists and organizers, armed with new ideas and new methods, and ready to carry them into hitherto inert and unorganized areas. Doubtless widespread 'explosions' are possible without them: the periodic simultaneous price-rioting over many parts of eighteenth-century England are examples, though they lack precisely the qualitative innovations in the movement which are so characteristic of the most typical 'explosion'. These have normally been associated with new types of leadership, organization or demands, themselves doubtless the product of the period of economic change with which the 'explosions' attempted to come to terms: Owenite and Chartist in the i830's, the International Workingmen's Association and its companion movements in the late i86o's and early i870's, the revived Socialism-Marxist or otherwise-in the late i88o's, i890's and early i900's, or else its revolutionary or syndicalist left wing. If we prefer, we may regard this as another example of that institutional rigidity which helps to make the movements discontinuous. Established leaders and organizers-for instance the Trade Union Congress leadership in the i88o's-might quite well have done much of the organizing that was left to Marxist and quasi-Marxist agitators; but it was to the latter that the unorganized had to turn for help and advice. The new leadership helped to give the 'explosions', as it were, a historic individuality; so much so that the layman automatically thi of Owen and the Grand National, of Burns, Mann and the Dockers, of the Syndicalists, when the explosions of the i830's, i88o's and i9io'S are mentioned, and remains less aware of the ideologically not so striking 'explosion' of i87I-2. Apart from the public relations side of the matter, however, they helped to weld a mass of discrete local, regional or sectional movements into a larger whole. The great all-embracing national unions of the unorganized after i889 were those dominated by the left wingDockers and Gasworkers; those which were not, tended to remain purely

- 1 Parl. Pap., 1902, XLIV: R.C. on the Port of London, p. 232.
- 'A calculation based on Mulhall, Dictionary of Statistics (i898 edn.), shows an average increase in tonnage entered and cleared in London, Liverpool, Cardiff, Newcastle, Shields, Bristol, Hull and Glasgow of between 45 and 50%.
- 3 Census i88i, i89i. Again, the vulnerability was proportionately greater than thus measured, for the increased complexity of a port which expanded without rationalizing its lay-out and methods put an increased premium on experienced workers, who knew the steadily more tangled ropes. See, for example, R. Williams, The Liverpool Docks Problem (Liverpool, 1912), pp. 21-2.

sectional or regional.' Beyond this, they provided the larger unifying force of common aims and slogans. Without the Owenites in 1834, or the Six Points of the Charter after i838, the very heterogeneous (and often contradictory) forces of discontent would almost certainly not have become a single, however fragile, national force. Historians might merely have noticed their co-existence. The same is true, to a lesser extent, of such. slogans as that of the Eight Hour Day in the i 88o's and early i890's. At certain moments such bodies as working class Internationals even succeeded in impressing a common stamp on simultaneous 'explosions' in different countries, though perhaps they attached too sanguine hopes to such activities.' Yet where the ideological impetus is greater than that provided by conference resolutions and the like, its power to make sparks leap from one country to others should not be underrated. It did so in 1830 and i848; and the 'explosion' in Central Europe in 1905-7 owed more than a little to the news of the greater one in Russia.3

We may sum up briefly and tentatively. Only individual analysis can reveal the specific combination of tensions which make up any given 'explosion', and attempts to discover exactly the same combination (as distinct from a general family resemblance in the patterns) are likely to be unsuccessful. Thus in Britain the main factors in the 1830's were perhaps the secular displacement of previously well-established groups, and direct pressure on labour standards. In the i86o's and i870's time-lags and discontinuities of technical growth may have been the most important. In 1889 the situation seems to have been dominated by the peculiar Great Depression pattern of technical stagnation, expanding business activity and falling profits. In i~i i all major factors may be traced, though technical discontinuities and falling real wages stand out.4 No doubt fuller analysis would attempt to distinguish smaller 'families' of 'explosions' within the larger one which has been considered here: those of countries engaged in the transition from pre-industrial society to industrial capitalism, those of classical nineteenth century 'free market' and competitive capitalism,6 and those of the modern capitalist economies, dominated by government, imperfect competition, and the 'second Industrial Revolution', and the various ways in which the uneven development of economies

- 1 E. Hobsbawm, 'General Labour Unions', loc. cit. p. 126.
- 2 The First International merely by common organization, the Second by the device of simultaneous mass demonstrations for standard demands, to which we owe May Day.
- 3 Jrb. f. Jationaloekonomie, 1905, p. 580, on the Czech Railway strike; Bauer, The Austrian Revolution (London, 1924), cap A, on the January i9i strikes.
- 4 There is again no comprehensive account of this 'explosion'. Askwith, Industrial Problems and Disputes (London, I920); Watney and Little, Industrial Warfare (London, 1912); Cole and Postgate, op. cit. sect. vII, are the most convenient introductions to a mass of contemporary public and private, primary and secondary material. Askwith,
- 5 Probably the only 'pure' case of this type, not significantly distorted by transition from pre-industry, by the monopolist phase, or by both, is that of Britain in the second half of the century.

combines and telescopes these. It is neither possible nor desirable to do this here. However, we may suggest that further study will not be much concerned with cyclical factors (unless, with Kondratiev, we choose to call qualitatively different phases of economic evolution 'cycles'). Purely short-term cyclical factors would seem to explain the timing of 'explosions' within individual cycles, but not much else.

These tentative suggestions are not put forward as solutions to the problem of the 'explosions'. Their main purpose is to draW attention to phenomena which need much more attention from students than they have received in the past, and which are sufficiently important for our general understanding of historical change to deserve it.

Birkbeck College, London