<!-- image -->

## Labor History

ISSN: 0023-656X (Print) 1469-9702 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/clah20

## When militancy isn't enough: The impact of automation on New York city building service workers, 1934-1970

## Grace Palladino

To cite this article: Grace Palladino (1987) When militancy isn't enough: The impact of automation on New York city building service workers, 1934-1970, Labor History, 28:2, 196-220, DOI: 10.1080/00236568700890111

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00236568700890111

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 28 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 68

View related articles

<!-- image -->

## WHEN MILITANCY ISN'T  ENOUGH: The  Impact of Automation  on  New  York City Building Service Workers, 1934-1970

## Grace Palladino*

George  Terborgh, Research rector  f the  achinery  and Di o M Allied  roducts nstitute, empted  n  1965  to  counter  harges P I att i c that  utomation  romised hronic  nd  catastrophic  vels  f na p c a le o u employment.  So-called armists,  eled  y  hostility   "unsubal fu b and stantiated  ars,"   argued,  ere  spreading  automation  ysteria" fe he w " h and  increasing e anxiety  a ess han  well-informed blic. th of l t pu Terborgh's  eading  f istory d  convinced  im  that  echnologr o h ha h t ical  rogress  nd  full  mployment  were  indeed ompatible, nce p a e c si previous  abor  isplacement d  proved emporary  r  transitional. l d ha t o "If utomation  s  simply echnological  ogress  r  mechanizaa i t pr o tion  n eneral,"    concluded,  it  s ifficult et larmed bout i g he " i d to  g a a it.  here  is othing ew or  revolutionary   this ocess  ... T n n in pr . -1

In  one  sense, erborgh  was correct: ere as nothing ew T th w n about he  fact  hat  echnological  novation  he orkplace ad t t t in int w h displaced  abor. o be sure,  19th  century hoemakers, lassl T s g workers, rinters,  d  other killed rkmen had  witnessed  he p an s wo t introduction    labor-saving  chinery and  he esulting  ansof ma t r tr formation f  their  rafts.  ut  if here as nothing ew about o c 2  B t w n defining  he problem  n hese istorical ms, either  as there t i t h ter n w

anything  ew in he olutions  ffered  o  deal ith t in e resent. n t s o t w i th p "The most effective  ay to  minimize  personal ardship  from w h change, hether  technological  other,"  rborgh counseled, w or Te "is to  maintain    stable  nd  expanding conomy."  Presidential  a a e A Ad visory ommittee  had offered imilar  dvice  in  1962,  laiming c s a c that echnological velopment  proved "essential he  general t de to  t welfare,  he  economic  strength, d  the  defense f  the ation. 3 t an o n ''

To the  worker  displaced  y  labor-saving  chnology, this b te tau tological rategy d  not  address  he mmediate problems wrought st di t i by  unemployment-  transitional  not. killed  orkers n  the ate or S w i l 19th  and  early  0th  centuries  d  relied  n their  nions  to  pro2 ha o u tect  them against  the chine;  but even the  best  organized ma workers, ho had  achieved ome measure  of  control  n  the hop w s o s floor,  ad  little  ntrol  ver  the ntroduction   machinery. lh co o i of A though  some trades ttempted o  resist  echanization hrough a t m t strikes d  boycotts,  ew  labor eaders  ncouraged his  pproach. an f l e t a "From  the xperience  f  all  rganized  rafts,"  e merican  Fede o o c th A eration f  Labor reported n 1898, for  example, o i "it has been demonstrated hat  the  policy f  opposing  the  introduction  f t o o labor-saving chinery  is oth  futile  nd  unwise." he Federama b a T tion nstead  ounseled hreatened  killed rkers o  develop olii c t s wo t p cies hat ight  make it ossible  o  "retain  ontrol  f  such  labor t m p t c o saving achines.  '4  f   union  could ot  prevent  he ntroduction m ' I a n t i of  labor-saving chinery, t ould  organize  o  prevent he  emma i c t t ployer rom  assuming  unilateral control at achinery  in  the f of  th m shop.

A union's  bility   implement  this trategy  f  control, wa to s o ho ever, epended  not  only  on  its  evel  f  organization d  relation d l o an to  management,  but  also n particular  nditions  ithin n  ino co w a dustry,  nd  the egree f  skill  nd  number of  workers displaced a d o a by new technology.  hen  the  printing  ndustry  ntroduced  he W i i t linotype achine in  the  1880s,  for  example,  the  International m Typographical  nion  (ITU)  enforced  ts  emand that  nion  comU i d u positors  e  employed  as  machine  operators. he  essential  ctor b "T fa

which  permitted  he  [ITU's] olicy o  work,"  Frederic  eyers t p t M noted n  an  introduction   eorge  Barnett's  udy f echnology i toG st o t and  the rinting dustry,  as  the act  hat  he kills  he omp in "w f t t s oft c positor  urned out   be  of  substantial  lue n he peration  f t to va i t o o the  machine."  n  the rinters' e,  hen, the  notype d  not  so I p cas t li di much  displace  kill  s  require  hat t  be  dapted  to  the  new s a t i a technology, s

If   policy  f ontrol  ffered  killed rkers heir  est hance a o c o s wo t b c to  protect  heir  ages  and  conditions  mployment  in he ace t w ofe t f of  industrial  ansformation,  as,  nevertheless,  trategy best tr it w a  s suited  o early ages f  technological  velopment,  hen mat st o de w chinery  iluted  kill, t  did  not  entirely place  uman labor. d s bu re h "The  more  severe  he isplacement  en by  the achine  or  new t d ofm m process," onomist umner Slichter ted n  1941, the ess he ec S no i " l t interest    the nion ill  e  in   policy  f ontrol, r the mple of u w b a o c fo si reason  hat  he achine  does  not rovide  nough  jobs o e  worth t t m p e t b a fight.  ~  ndeed, s  technological  velopment roceeds rom '' I a de p f mechanization o automation, nd labor-saving  echnology t a t replaces  ntire oups f  workers nd  destroys  hole  occupations, e gr o a w a  union's  bility   rotect  ts  embers is ircumscribed corda top i m c ac ingly.  n  this  ense,  hen,  here  s omething ew about he roI s t t i s n t p cess f  automation  nd  the ttendant oblem  of abor  isplaceo a a pr l d ment: the unskilled  obs  that  were created hrough  earlier j t mechanization  nd  dilution   skill  an  now be  automated out a of c of  existence.  cause  automation  oes  not erely ransform  erBe d m t c tain occupations   rather  nnihilates  em, t  ullifies  nion's but a th i n a  u ability   control the  ce  or  scale f  the  process. to pa o

Although  many observers  uggested hat orkers displaced s t w by  automation ould  "make plans o  move to  another ccupac t o tion,"  isplaced  nskilled rkers  required  raining   order o d u wo t in t do  so. lans o mplement utomation, wever, ere  not ccomP t i a ho w a panied y  plans to train ese  orkers.  During eriods  f  conb re th w " p o version  o  automated rocesses,"  lter lliott, usiness  ont p Wa E a  b c sultant, plained,  it tands o  reason  [that]  ome people ill ex " s t s w be  switched  o ther  obs- f  hey an  handle hem." f hey ould t o j i t c t I t c not, e  added, they uld  undoubtedly  fall   the ayside."  e h wo " by w H

SBarnett, xvii.

went  on  to ake  the arger int: hese eople  ust  re ot rained m l po "T p j a n t or  prepared o  live  n  today's  conomic  society. t i e ''7

One such  group  of  ill-prepared, killed rkers  were  the uns wo elevator  perators  n  New  York City. ndeed, the plementao i I im tion f  automated echnology  everely  ndermined  their  bility o t s u a to  resist   even  shape  such  change. heir nion, hich  had  reor T u w lied  n  militant rikes   gain ecent ages  and  working  condio st to d w tions for the  y's ast  killed,  ast  ducated orkers,  as  rencit le s le e w w dered owerless  y  the ise  f utomatic, eratorless  chinery p b r o a op ma that ot  only efused he nion's  trike  eapon,  but  eliminated n d t u s w an entire  ategory  f  employment. c o

"Lord  God,"  William  Saroyan rote  in  his hort tory  The w s s " World's hampion Elevator  perator,"  how he  could eet  the C O m floor,  pen  the oor, et ut  passengers, ose he  door, nd  go o d l o cl t a right up  o  the op  floor,  very ittle  tail perfectly d, xt t e l de time e ecuted, nd  rounded  out  with..,  ndications    kindness,  ua i of h mility,  enerosity, d natural  oodness ... But if  Saroyan g an g . " romanticized e ob  of  the levator erator and spected  the th j e op re " skill,  ccuracy,  race, nd ease"  displayed  y  these  orkers, a g a b w building  wners  and  managers  did ot oncur.  From their  oint o n c 8 p of  view  elevator erators  ere  no  more than  one  variable in op w a real  state  rofit uation,  nd  owners  and  managers  sought o e p eq a t keep  expenses,  nd  therefore  ges,  as  low  as  the arket ould a wa m w bear. n  the arly  930s, or xample, levator erators  n  New I e 1 f e e op i York  City ight  work  anywhere  from  60  to 2 hours  or s little m 7 f a as  $16  to  $20  a  week-sometimes  earning nly  thirty nts n o ce a hour.    With  no  vacations  nd  no sick eave,  levator  perators 9 a l e o enjoyed o  job  security d, ike  ther orkers n he re-union n an l o w i t p era, erved  at  their  upervisors'  easure? s s pl °

Building  ervice  orkers roved  especially  fficult  orgas w p di to nize nd  the ew  local  nions hat  xisted  rior  o  1934  met  with a f u t e p t little  ccess.  ertainly ployer ostility ibited  ganization, su C em h inh or but  so  did he ow  skilled,  w  status  ature f he ork  and  the t l lo n o t w decentralized ructure  f  the  industry.  ith fewer  than  ten st o W workers  in  each  of  some 4000  buildings   New  York City,  min e ployment  in  the uilding  ervice  ndustry  id  not  impart uch b s i d m sense f  community  or  the hop  floor  olidarity t  mpowered o s s ha e production  orkers.'1 evator  perators,  wever, rovided  he w El o ho p t key  to rganizing ilding rvice workers. ause  elevator ero bu se Bec op ators  nteracted  th he ublic, ey ere  more  accessible   nion i wi t p th w tou organizers  han he est  f  the taff. re importantly,  evator t t r o s Mo el operators  ontrolled  cess  o ertical  ansportation not  n c ac t v tr onlyi residential  ighborhoods,  ut, ignificantly,  anufacturing ne b s in  m and  financial  stricts. ew  York  City levators ayed   crudi In  N e pl a cial  ole  n he ity's economy, nsporting ds, ersonnel, il, r i t c tra goo p ma and  customers  p  and  down the owers hat  onstituted  e ity's u t t c th c skyline.  elevator rike uld ffectively alyze  hat  conomy. An st co e par t e

The  Building  ervice  mployees'  nternational  on, n  AFL S E I Uni a affiliate  artered  n  1921, began  rganizing  perators  n  New ch i o o i York City  in  1934, fter    group  of  black perators  alked  out a a o w to  protest  he  dismissal  f  a fellow orker.  In April  934  the t o w 1 BSEIU chartered  ocal 2B and  by  June  the ocal  ounted ome L 3 l c s 500 members. After  union  leaders ad surveyed  wages and h working  conditions, esident  ames Bambrick threatened  o Pr J t strike  n  October  1934  to  secure   minimum  wage of  $35 for i a a 40-hour  week. When  elevator  perators, th  the  help  of  the o wi ILGWU and the  eamsters,  hut own vertical  ansportation T s d tr in the  garment  district    November 1, nd  when union rganizers on a o aggressively  nd successfully fended  pickets gainst trike a de a s breakers,  embers of  Local 2B demonstrated  he ower  of  colm 3 t p lective  ction  o  worker  and  owner  alike.  ithin  two days  the a t W union  had  a  signed greement n and  that  rovided  or   closed a i h p f a

for  securing  mployment and  then  split  he  fee ith  supers ho in  turn requently red e t w w f fi workers  and  started  he hole  process gain. ee  A.H. Raskin, At  20,  Local  32B Is  Still t w a S " Going  Up," New York Times, April 8,  1954  (hereafter  e 1 th New York  Times is ited  s c a NYT). "Figures re  from  Walter  Gordon Merritt, a Destination  Unknown, fty  ears f abor RelaFi Y o L tions (New York,  1951), 210.  thur arckham,  an  early  eader  f  32B,  noted hat  ne  such Ar H l o t o union, ocal  58  "had  been  in xistence  rom  1923  to  1934  [but]  t ccomplished  bsolutely L e f i a a nothing or  its embers." f m Building Service Employee, April  1943,  7.

## Membership Figures for  BSEIU Local 32B, 1934-1972

TABLE 1.

|   Year | Total  Membership*   | Increase  rom  f Previous  Total   | %  Increase   |
|--------|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------|
|   1934 | 6,500                |                                    |               |
|   1940 | 15,281               | 8,781                              | 135           |
|   1942 | 19,465               | 4,184                              | 27            |
|   1945 | 22,376               | 2,911                              | 15            |
|   1950 | 33,256               | 10,880                             | 49            |
|   1955 | 33,617               | 361                                | 1             |
|   1960 | 37,273               | 3,620                              | 11            |
|   1964 | 39,568               | 2,295                              | 6             |
|   1968 | 40,903               | 1,335                              | 3             |
|   1972 | 42,087               | 1,184                              | 3             |

shop,  immediate  wage increases, d future rbitration  f  wages, an a o hours,  and working conditions.  ocal  32B also  dramatically  nL i creased n  size-  he  union's o-called lying  quadrons"  induced i t s "f s some 6000 building  service workers  o  join  ranks and  support t the  local. 12

If he  1934 strike akened the  industry  o  the otential llect aw t p co tive ower of  previously  mpotent, nskilled, rkers,  a strike  n p i u wo i 1936  clearly  emonstrated  their  orce.  alling  his  wo  week strike d f C t t "the  most disastrous  ew York ever  experienced,"  alter  Gordon N W Merritt,  ttorney or  the  real state  wners,  added that citizens a f e o " and public  fathers were  thrown]  into  a state f  confusion nd [ o a alarm. '13  usinessmen flooded  Mayor  Fiorello  aGuardia's  of-' B L fice with  essages of  impending financial  oom  while  others m d offered dvice  on how to deal  ith  militant  abor  leaders.  An a w l " announcement from you that  ou will sk for dequate  continy a a

## TABLE  2.

5

Figures  are  from 32B (April, 46) 19

<!-- image -->

gents  of  the  National uard of  this city    protecting  ll hose G in a t who are  at ork,"  one  tax-payer  rote, will  revent  iolence  .. w w " p v .. The  turning  ut  of  the ational  uard  would  reassure  he eople o N G t p of  this own that aw  and order  would be  preserved,"  e added. t l h "That accomplished  there  will  be time to take  up whatever grievances  he levator  perators  nd  their  nions hink hey ay t e o a u t t m have.  ,14 ,

These  and  other trikes de it ossible  or uilding  ervice s ma p f b s workers o  improve heir  iving d  working onditions.  though t t l an c Al wages  for levator erators  nd other  uilding  ervice  orkers e op a b s w were  never igh,  ew York City orkers id njoy early  ncreases h N w d e y i between  1934  and  1940  (Table  ) nd  were  ready nd  able o trike 1 a a t s to  insure  hose ncreases, ocal  32B also rew steadily  hese t i isL g int years  claiming 500 members by the  end of 1934  and 15,281 6 members by  1940  (Table  ). ut  if heir  ontrol  f ertical trans2 B t c o v portation  nd  their  rowing  union  seemed  to  put  operators  ea g s curely  n he  driver's  at,  heir current  cess  aised  he ossii t se t suc r t p bility  f  their uture emise.  "Building  wners fear hat ny o f d o t a substantial  crease  ages  for ervice  mployees ill  orce  hem in inw s w f t to  install  bor  aving  evices,"  e la s d th New York  Times reported  arly e in  1935, nd  Walter ordon  Merritt  rovided  itnesses  o estify a G p w t t to  that act t  arbitration  arings.  erritt  emonstrated  hat f a he M d t realty ners  were  experimenting t  only ith utomatic  pushow no w a " button" levators, t  automatic crubbing evices nd walle bu s d a spraying  achines. eorge  W. Martin, upervisory gineer  or m G s en f the  U.S. ealty nd  Improvement  Company, added  that e  and R a h his ommittee ad  been  analyzing e ork  force  for  everal  ears c h th w " s y to  determine  hether  'non-essential  p  has  not  crept nto he w hel i t picture.'"6 h  testimony  ailed   intimidate mes  Bambrick Suc f to Ja who countered  hat  ocal 2B would  not  abandon  its  stand  or t L 3 " f higher ages and shorter  ours"  despite  he  threats  mplied. w h t i 17

These  were, owever, o  idle  hreats. though he roducts h n t Al t p mentioned  at  the  arbitration rings  ere  not  yet n  use  on a hea w i wide  scale,  he echnology  hat  ade them  possible s  certainly t t t m wa in  the orks.  8  As early  s  1894  the tis levator  ompany had w ~ a O E C installed  tomatic  levators   hat  they alled  houses f retenau e inw c " o p sion."  ne Otis d  noted hat Automatic lectric elevators O a t " e are particularly  l-adapted r rivate sidence  ervice..,  with wel fo p re s as our  improved  push-button  ystem  of  control  n  elevator tens a at dant  is nnecessary.  19 cro-drive,  mechanical  loor-levelling u '' Mi a f

device hat  romised ccurate  andings  very time, d  been  pert p a l e ha fected  y  1915  and  by  1924  the ompany had  announced he eb c t d velopment f  "Signal  ontrol"  hich, hey ointed  ut, elieved o C w t p o r "the operator   all ties  xcept hat f pressing ttons nd of du e t o bu a closing  he  car  doors."  hus the  speed  of an levator, e  Otis t T e th Company added, [is]  o  longer  imited  he bility     human " n l tot a ofa operator  o udge lurred  loor  umbers  and  to  answer flashing t j b f n signals.  2° spite    significant p  in levator les  uring he '' De a dro e sa d t Great  Depression,  he ompany continued  o  develop ore aut c t m tomatic  quipment. n  1936, ccording  o  an  annual eport, e e I a t r th company made available or he  first  ime  a complete ine f "f t l o both  passenger  nd  freight evators th  a  control  perated  y a el wi o b buttons-  inger ip control."    Otis ompany noted hat  unF t The C t " doubtedly,  inger  ip  ontrol ll  ventually  place  ll types  ich f t c wi e re a wh depend  on the uman element or  good  service.  21  y the idh f '' B m 1930s, hen,  t east  echnologically,   ob  of  an  elevator ert a l t thej op ator o  longer  equired  ny  specialized  ills   knowledge hort n r a sk or s of  common  sense  and  a pleasant  anner. m

At the  same time  that he  elevator  ndustry  as perfecting t i w automatic  ervice, cal 2B fought  uccessfully  improve ages s Lo 3 s to w and  working  conditions r ts  embers.  A short strike 939 fo i m in  1 brought   wage increase  nd  in  1942  the nion on a  legislative a a u w fight  hen  the ourts  greed hat  ertain ilding rvice rkers w c a t c bu se wo were  covered y Federal  age and  hour  statutes d  entitled b w an to overtime  ay.  2  During orld  War II nion embers participated p 2 W u m in  homefront ctivities,  ecially  vil  efense rograms.   But a esp ci d p 23 when some 8000 workers  broke  their  o-strike reement,  2B n ag 3 faced  public isapproval. d 24

In 1945  he local  ain taged    major trike,  is  ime o rot ag s a s th t t p test  he egional r Labor  Board's  ecision  o  scale  own wage t r Wa d t d and hour  recommendations ubmitted y an impartial  oard. s b b

When  the  union  chose  to  strike  ather  han  appeal he  decision, r t t representatives    the  real state  ndustry  efused o  meet with of e i r t union  leaders.  n  September  24,  1945 elevator  ervice  n  more O s i than  2000  office  uildings  as curtailed.  re was at  stake han b w Mo t the  wage and  hour  dispute: al  state  pokesmen  were  determined re e s to prove  nce  and  for ll  hat nion  leadership ould not  e  apo a t u sh b peased. It s ore important  o  vindicate  he  right  f  the  public " i m t t o in  the  present risis  han  to  settle  he  particular sue,"  alter c t t is W Gordon Merritt  ade clear.  [T]he nion  must  be resisted in m " u the present old  up,"  he added,  "so  that t earns or  all ime  that h i l f t the  people ave  the ourage o  defend hemselves  n  such  crises.  2s h c t t i ''

The 1945 strike  eawakened  the  public o  the  importance f r t o vertical ansportation  modern city  ife. w  York  City's ,440 tr i l Ne 43 elevators-20°70  f  all he  elevators  n  the  .S. - arried ome o t i U - c s 18,000,000 assengers  ore than  10,000  miles   day.  6  When  32B p m a 2 shut  down service  n  the  garment  district,  e  garment  industry i h lost 18,000,000  in  the  first  hree ays  of  the  strike  nd some $ t d a $20,000,000  before  the  strike  as settled.  The United  States w 27 government  lost oney as  well. lthough  Federal orkers  were m A w unable  to  enter heir  ew  York City ffices, me $8,000,000 n t N o so i daily ages still  d to  be aid  out.  This  was no strike  gainst w ha p a the  building  wners  and managers,  Walter  Gordon Merritt no a nounced in the New  York  Times, this as "a  strike  gainst  he w a t United  States  f  America.  '2s spite erritt's  edge to  old  the o ' De M pl h line gainst  nion  wage demands, Governor  Thomas  E. Dewey a u was eager  for  a settlement  nd consequently  rdered  the  sides a o to  arbitrate  eir  ifferences.  ilding  wners  and  managers  were th d Bu o especially gry  when the  union, ather  han  being unished or an r t p f instigating trike, n most  of  its  emands.  29  Not only  did  the a  s wo d

Sept. 9,  1945. 2

zSNYT,

## Construction  of  Office  Buildings anhattan  1947-1958 M

TABLE 3.

|                               | Total onstruction  C   | Total onstruction  C         |
|-------------------------------|------------------------|------------------------------|
| Year                          | Number of  Buildings   | Rentable rea  A Square  Feet |
| Total  Construction           | 109                    | 35,973,800                   |
| Completed                     | 63                     | 16,130,000                   |
| For Completion                | 19                     | 7,431,300                    |
| Plans  Filed                  | 27                     | 12,412,500                   |
| Competitive                   | 91                     | 32,871,800                   |
| Completed 1947-56             | 50                     | 14,242,000                   |
| 1947                          | 2                      | 682,000                      |
| 1948                          | 3                      | 224,000                      |
| 1949                          | 2                      | 273,000                      |
| 1950                          | 7                      | 2,929,000                    |
| 1951                          | 7                      | 981,000                      |
| 1952                          | 3                      | 995,000                      |
| 1953                          | 2                      | 773,000                      |
| 1954                          | 9                      | 2,246,OOO                    |
| 1955                          | 6                      | 1,907,000                    |
| 1956                          | 9                      | 3,232,000                    |
| For Completion 1956- 67       | 16                     | 6,649,300                    |
| Plans Filed  1956  - 58       | 25                     | I  1,980,500                 |
| Non-Competitive and Specialty | 18                     | 3,102,000                    |
| Completed 1949-55             | 13                     | 1,888,000                    |
| 1949                          | I                      | 39,000                       |
| 1950                          | 4                      | 1,085,000                    |
| 1951                          | I                      | 235,000                      |
| 1953                          | 3                      | 184,000                      |
| 1954                          | I                      | 53,000                       |
| 1955                          | 3                      | 292,000                      |
| For Completion 1956- 67       | 3                      | 782,000                      |
| Plans Filed  1956- 58         | 2                      | 432,000                      |

Compilations rom October  1956 survey  by the  Research  Department  of  the  Real f Estate oard of  New  York. B

1945  strike  ost he eal state  ndustry ome $35,000,000  n  wage c t r e i s i increases, t  the rbitration agreement ggested  hat nly egular bu a su t o r increases  ould guarantee  industrial  eace2 w p °

The value  of  industrial ace  should  not  be  underestimated pe

in  New  York City  during he  post-war ra, specially   the  real t e e as estate  ndustry  ecovered  rom  the lump  induced y  years f  ecoi r f s b o nomic depression  ollowed y  years f  world  war.  By 1947,  both f b o new construction d  competition  etween  new and  established an b buildings  or  tenants  ere  on the  rise Table  3). s real state f w ( A e spokesmen  promoted  programs  to  "sell" e  concept f  efficient th o yet  luxurious  pace, levator  ervice  ook  on  new significance s e s t in this modernized" orld.  "Elevators  re  your  Public elations " w a R Contact  #1,"  the Westinghouse Electric ompany C reminded building  wners  and  managers. When elevators ve ncrowded o " gi u efficient  rvice,"  ey dvertised,  he egular  ulse f  their  perse th a "t r p o o ations  ndicate  healthy  ondition.   Elevator  perators  lso ad i a c "31 o a h important  oles  o  play n aining  nd  keeping ood will  nd  full r t i g a g a occupancy.  One building anager,  who had compiled  a list  f m o "Thirty  ays to  Keep Tenants  Happy,"  reported  n  a  successful W o campaign  to  encourage  elevator  ttendants  o  greet ll isitors a t a v with  the  words,  "Good Morning,  Mr.,  Mrs., iss,  or  Sir. t's M I a fine ay." This  slight  alutation,"   manager  explained,  may d " s the " seem  unimportant  ut  actually creases  riendliness    the art b in f on p of  the enants  nd  office  isitors  ike.  32 d in  New York  City, t a v al '' An managers  of  the  Cities  ervice uilding sed  female  operators, S B u the  "Towerettes,"    great advantage. ll  groomed and oised," to "We p one observer  noted,  "these  smartly  dressed  young women" provided  the  building's in attraction23 ma

Even as  a  revitalized  nstruction dustry  enewed  interest co in r in  the  elevator  perator,  t  also  played  an important ole  in o i r eliminating  he  job  altogether. vances in  technology oved t Ad m the  elevator  ndustry  loser  o  displacing e  "human element," i c t th and new buildings  rovided n  uncontested  errain  n  which  to p a t i test  nd  perfect  hese nnovations.   1948,  Otis levator  evela t i In E d oped  "Autotronic"  new traffic  ntrol  ystem,  nd  Westinghouse a co s a advertised  Selectomatic"  "unique... ntrol  ystem  that u-" a co s a tomatically tches  elevator  ervice  ith  changing  traffic nma s w co ditions."  stinghouse  also ntroduced "Synchro-Glide"  950, We i in  1 a system  that ontrolled  he  separate  obs  of  starting d  stopc t j an

ping  the  cars,  pening  and  closing  oors, nd  making  "fast, o d a ac curate,  nd smooth floor evel andings.  34  tis  had developed a l l '' O similar  lectronic provements  and  in  1951  proudly nnounced e im a their  utstanding  chievement f  recent  ears-  he evelopment o a o y t d of  Otis utotronic  levatoring  hich  provided intensive eraA E w " op tion  of  a group  of  elevators  ith  controls  o  completely utow s a matic  that o attendants  re  needed  in  the  cars. 3s n a ''

Elevator  perators  ontinued  o  figure  n he levator dustry's o c t i t e in advertising mpaigns- ut  increasingly    as  their  bsence,  ot ca b it w a n their  resence,  hat ade for  greater  rentability."  ing  that p t m " Not "the  competition  or esirable  enants  as  intensified,"   obf d t h one server  rgued hat ld  buildings  ith  manual  elevators uld ot a t o w co n compete with  more modern,  efficient,  rvice  vailable   new se a in buildings.36 ispel  he hadow  of  time,"  he estinghouse lec"D t s t W E tric  ompany  advised uilding  wners  in  1954. [A]n nvestment C b o " i in...  elevator  odernization  ay be  just hat  your  building m m w needs  to  help  ou meet new building  ompetition.  37 y c '' Buildings editor .J. 'Connell  evidently  oncurred nd he  informed  his S O c a readers hat The best insurance  ainst  ompetition  s  MODt " ag c i ERNIZATION.  ''3s

As long  as  operators re  still  quired  n he ars,  he arket we re i t c t m demand for  modern environments nd increased  fficiency a e al leged y  both  industries  d ot nduce wners  of xisting ildings b di n i o e bu to  implement  change. n  1953, or xample, ealtor rray  RanI f e r Mu dell  omplained hat  he ost f  conversion  eterred owners  om c t t c o d fr modernizing  service29  y the  mid-1950s, owever,  after  he  inB h t

3sOtis levator  ompany, E C

Annual  Report,

1951,  23.

dustry ad  perfected  he echnology, there   no good  reason, h t t was industry  pokesman  argued,  ot o  convert. evator  dvertising s n t El a campaigns  stressed  he economy f  eliminating erators  nd t o op a added  that he  savings in ges and  benefits uld offset nt wa wo co version  osts·  t  the ame  time,  he levator dustry inted  ut c A s t e in po o that utomation,  y  replacing e  operator, turned  ontrol  f a b th re c o the  workplace  to  the  employer. he automatic ar,  industry T c spokesmen  noted, never eaves  ts  ost,  ever oes  for   smoke " l i p n g a · . . never ets nquisitive, ertinent,.., less  r  intoxicated, g i imp care o and  never  allows ts ttention   be  disturbed  or  single  oi a to f a m ment from  the erformance f  its  ask."  nd,  another  bserver p o t A o added,  automatics  don't  trike, t  sick,  r  flirt . ,o " s ge o ... ,,

Exciting  s  these  ew automatic  levators  peared o he lea n e ap t t e vator ndustry, ither the  blic,  or the  SEIU  expected hat i ne pu n B t operatorless  evators uld  completely  eplace  anual  service. el co r m At these  arly  tages  f  conversion  t eemed  clear  hat  levator e s o i s t e operators  ould remain  in  public nstitutions  commercial w i and buildings  hat oused  numerous  tenants  nd  served   variety  f t h a a o customers.  esidential  ildings re  more  suitable r odernR bu we fo m ization, t  how would  aged  and  handicapped enants  r  chilbu t o dren  cope  with hese  ew fangled  ontraptions?  dn't  veryone t n c Di e run  the isk  f eing tranded  n   pilotless  evator r r  losing r o b s i a el ca o a  limb n ts  utomatic  oors? he  union eemed  to hink  o  and i i a d T s t s it ublicized is  iew. A umber  of  tenants  lso ade this  ase, p th v n a m c suggesting  hat  he ublic  as  not ltogether  nvinced  hat  he t t p w a co t t "human element" roved  detrimental   elevator  ervice. p to s 41

Countering  he levator dustry's  vertisement mpaigns, t e in ad ca tenants  roups in  ew  York City  organized  o  halt onversion g N t c of  manual  elevators,   east  he uildings  hich  they esided. atl int b inw r The most  vocal pposition   operatorless  evators me from o to el ca well-to-do nants  ho inhabited me  of he ost  expensive  nd te w so t m a fashionable artment ouses  in  Manhattan  and  who were  acap h customed  to  paying  high  price or ervice.  n  February 949 a f s I 1 twenty-seven  uch  tenants  ad  filed it  o ompel  their  andlord s h su t c l

to  restore nually perated  levators,  iformed oormen,  and ma o e un d other ervices;   May another  roup won  its  ight to  ve  these s in g f ha services  estored.  eir uccess  ncouraged  thers  ho based heir r Th s e o w t challenge  n  the rovision  he ew York  State  mergency  Rent o p oft N E control  aw  requiring ndlords  rovide  he ame  "essential la top t s ser vices"  hat  ad  been  offered  rior  o he nactment f  the aw.  2 t h p t t e o l 4

Despite ndustry  ssertions at ublic emand for odern i a th p d m efficient  rvice  etermined  he  decision  o  automate levators, se d t t e tenants  bviously  referred  he  "human touch" o  operatorless o p t t cars.  n fact,  position   conversion  as strong  nough  to  inI op to w e duce  the levator Industries ciation  publish tudy roving E Asso to a  s p that  utomation  id ot iminish  he uality   apartment  ife. a d n d t q of l 43 Articles in Buildings also mplied  hat  enants re  not emanding i t t we d automation.  It's  good  idea,  hen embarking pon  an  elevator " a w u modernization  rogram," ne  building  anager  pointed  ut  in p o m o 1956,  "to  seek  impartial lp  in  determining  our  needs ... he y . Asking  tenants...   he  oted, may  put you  ext o  some who ," n " n t will ut  up  with he nefficient vator rvice  n  the opes  for p t i ele se i h lower  rents."  nother  article ggested n  1957  that uilding A su i b managers  make careful  lans or onversion. ome people ep f c "S r sist  hange,"  he  article's hor xplained,  and  it s ust uch c t aut e " i j s people s  this  ho will  tart  petition  rculating our uilding a w s a ci iny b to  force ou  to  put  operators  ack  on your  cars." y b

Advertisements  lso uggested  hat  ublic  cceptance  f  aua s t p a o tomatic  levators  s  not o  widespread  s ndustry ess  eleases e wa s a i pr r indicated.  though, or xample, estinghouse ad  explained Al f e W h in  1954  that  he levator s not  exactly  peratorless  nce t e wa o si "you were  the perator,"    1955 he ompany  pointed  ut hat  nvisible o in t c o t i infra-red ams "watched" he  passengers  nd  "protected em be t a th against  ishap."  ikewise,  he tis ompany took  pains o  exm L t O C t plain,  n  1953, that eratorless  rs ere  equipped ith  "autoi op ca w w matic levator  perators.., ly  rained th nstantaneous  ece o ful t wi i el tronic  eflexes at  ever ire  r  slow  down." y 1956  the ompany r th n t o B c

$4,711

7,500

4,406

5,316

3,622

5,470

5,832

4,424

TABLE 4. Elevator Attendant  Service Costs

|                       | Per  Elevator  er Year  P   | Per  Elevator  er Year  P   | Per  Elevator  er Year  P     | Per  Elevator  er Year  P   | Per  Elevator  er Year  P   | Per  Elevator  er Year  P   |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                       | Wages                       |                             | Welfare  Uniforms  Facilities |                             |                             | A  &amp; S  Total               |
| Boston,  Mass.        | $3,627                      | $478                        | $ 86                          | $145                        | $375                        |                             |
| Chicago, U.  I        | 6,107                       | 487                         | 131                           | 77                          | 698                         |                             |
| Detroit,  ich.  M     | 3,392                       | 146                         | 124                           | 124                         | 620                         |                             |
| Los  Angeles,  Ca.    | 4,022                       | 318                         | 98                            | 90                          | 438                         | 4,966                       |
| New  York,  N.Y.      | 5,341                       | 597                         | 174                           | 90                          | 965                         | 7,167                       |
| Philadelphia,  .  Pa  | 4,168                       | 356                         | 112                           | 118                         | 562                         |                             |
| San Francisco,  a.  C | 4,915                       | 456                         | 60                            | 58                          | 62                          | 5,551                       |
| St.  Paul, inn.  M    | 3,488                       | 50                          | 50                            | 17                          | 17                          |                             |
| Seattle,  ash.  W     | 4,495                       | 339                         | 120                           | 95                          | 421                         |                             |
| Washington,  D.C.     | 4,528                       | 464                         | 143                           | 111                         | 586                         |                             |
| National verage  A    | 3,574                       | 250                         | 102                           | 81                          | 417                         |                             |

## Explanation  f  headings: o

Wages-includes  alaries  f  relief  nd  replacement  perators s o a o

Welfare-includes  cial  security,  taxes  ther enefits so and o b

Uniforms-includes e  cost f  cleaning nd replacement

th

o

a

Facilities-includes cost  f  maintaining    locker oom the o a r

A  &amp;  S-administration and supervision-includes   cost ring nd  training the hi a

Figures  from Buildings 53 (July,  953), .  37. 1 p

was experimenting  ith Elevoice"   innovation at  romised w " an th p to  keep  "the uman touch  in  automatic  levators.  5 h e ''4

Although  public  esistance    operatorless  evators d  not r to el di completely  ubside,   essened  ramatically    the id-1950s fter s it l d by m a the levator dustry  ad  introduced tomatic  ars quipped ith e in h au c e w electronic  es hat  ould ense nd  respond o  passenger  oveey t c s a t m ment and  thus better  ntrol  he  doors. his hurdle ercome, co t T ov the  industry  ocused dvertising  mpaigns  on  the inancial  f a ca f ad vantages  f peratorless vators, d  spokesmen  for the ilding o o ele an bu service  ndustry opted heir  efrain.  en Otis osed  the uesi ad t Wh p q tion  What  does levator-attendant  ice  ost  he uilding ner " e serv c t b ow in  salary  nd  indirect penses?"  he  company noted hat otal a ex t t t costs er year  an  as  high  as  $7500  in  Chicago, ith ew  York p r w N City  close  ehind t  $7167. hese  costs,  he ompany was quick b a T t c

to  point ut, ncluded irect  ages and  relief erator's  ges, o i d w op wa social  ecurity yments, axes,  ringe  enefits, iform  cleaning s pa t f b un and replacement osts,  nd administrative  sts.    (Table 4) c a co 46

"We may think e exercise  ontrol  ver  the wages f... mw c o o e ployees,"  .J. 'Connell rote  in  an  editorial,  ut  actually S O w "b we don't.  heir arnings  ill ontinue o  rise  n close tio  ith  the T e w c t i ra w cost f  living-whether e  workers are  nionized r  not.  '47 o th u o ' Al though Buildings reported  o abrupt hange  in  the  labor ituan c s tion  in  1954,  it lso tressed  he  fact hat,  n  almost  every ity, a s t t i c "operating  mployees  have been eceiving  ome kind  of  increase e r s in  wages and/or  benefits. 8 ''4

And, although ental  ates  ad  reached n  "all time  gh" cr r h a hi a cording  to  industry pokesmen, net  earnings ad apparently s h declined.  This  is o paradox,"  urray E.  Randell,  Chicago " n M a realtor  oted, for his s  painfully  nd  alarmingly  lear.  pern " t i a c O ating xpenses  during he  last  en  year eriod ave  increased  n e t t p h i the  larger  ities  reater  apidity an ncome ...  In  Chicago c atg r th i . " alone,  andell ointed ut, perating  osts ose rom  twenty-six R p o o c r f cents o  fifty nts er  square oot etween  1952  and  1953, hanks t ce p f b t to  a  successful rike   elevator  perators  n  1952  which  brought st by o i improved  wages,  benefits, d,  in  1954,  the 0-hour  week.  "The an 4 gravity  f  this alamity,"  andell  explained,  brought onstero c R " c nation nd  anxiety, as   all  elt  hat    great  atastrophe d  bea we f t a c ha fallen  s." or  Randell,  s  for ther ig  city  uilding  anagers, u F a o b b m the  solution  eemed clear: eratorless evators  ffered  good s op el o " or  better  ervice  t  tremendous  savings n  labor. 49 s a i ''

Throughout  the  1950s dvertising  mpaigns ontinued  o  stress a ca c t the  cost-cutting  pects  f  automated ervice. en, for  xample, as o s Wh e a mythical anager pondered  the  high  cost  of  elevator  ervice, m s the  Otis  Elevator ompany  made what  they  considered  o  be C t a sensible  uggestion: hy not  let  our  tenants  perate  our  elevas "W y o y tors?"  he Westinghouse  Electric  ompany  reminded  building T C owners  that  with peratorless  evators.., ndard  ixed  harges " o el sta f c are  reduced nd  tardiness d  sickness  roblems  are  solved."  na an p I deed, s  the tis ompany reiterated, f-service  evators fered a O C sel el of

"the  only  substantial  vings  n  building peration..,  ailable sa i o av today.  's° e National  ssociation  f  Building wners and  Man-' Th A o O agers ollowed he  elevators dustry's  ad. The  benefit  f  selff t in le " o service  levators   building  anagement,"  a  spokesman  reported, e to m "lies  rincipally   ost eduction  hrough limination   operators' p inc r t e of wages." nd,  the  elevator  ndustry  rgued,  he nstallation his A i a t i of  t new technology would  ay  for tself,  nce onversion  osts ould p i si c c c be recovered hrough  these avings21 t s

If utomatic levators  ffered  ncreased  avings  o  real  state a e o i s t e owners  and  managers  and  increased  usiness to  evator  ompab el c nies,  they  also  decreased   union's bility  o protect heir the a t t members' jobs  nd  wage standards.  n  New  York City ages  for a I w building ervice  orkers  had increased  etween 137 and 168070 s w b between 1940 and 1953,  but  the  introduction   automatic leof e vators nd improved  cleaning quipment  and methods allowed a e building  wners  to  cut the  ize f  their  ervice  taff.   fact,  y o s o s s In b 1953, ome 12,000 embers of  Local  32B were  unemployed,  2 us m s A tomation,  owever,  was accomplishing  ore than  the  reduction h m of  the ocal's mbership  rolls:   ffectively  fused 2B's eretol me ite de 3 h fore owerful trike  eapon.  When  the nion  struck  n  1950,  for p s w u i example,  officers cognized hat heir ost potent  strategyre t t m the  elevator  trike- uld  never gain ose  the hreat  t ad  even s wo a p t i h five  ears arlier.  irst  f  all," vid  Sullivan, esident  f  32B, y e "F o Da Pr o reported o  the  BSEIU  convention n  1950,  "the  strike  e just t i w completed  was forced pon us  because  of  the  fact hat or the u t f first  ime  in  our  h i s t o r y . . .   anagement]  refused  rbitration. [m a And that,"  e predicted,  s ust  sign  of  what is  going  to  be h "i j a expected rom  now on." ice-President omas Shortman  conf V Th curred  and added  that,  again  the  irst  ime,  employers  did for f not  hire trike eakers to  n  the levators t  relied  n  "tenants' s br ru e bu o committees"  to  do the  job.  3 s

Although  the SEIU had  recognized  s  early  s  1937  that  uB a a a tomatic levators  hreatened  o  displace  levator  perators, e e t t e o th

union  leadership  pparently  id  not  appreciate  he  severity  f a d t o that hreat,    As late  s  1955,  for xample, he  BSEIU  still nt s4 a e t co tended  that ertain  uildings  ould never  be serviced  y autoc b w b matics. Employers  have  found  that n  medical  buildings  here " i t is  a  real afety  actor  nvolved," mbers of  the  Committee on s f i me Elevator  perators  eported to  e nnual onvention.  In otels, O r th a c " h department  stores,  nd  hospitals, e  service  hat s erformed a th t i p by  operators  annot e  duplicated   machinery.  e can  succeed c b by W in  retaining  perators  n  such  properties,"  e  committee  cono i th cluded,  "by  a sound education rogram and by legislative  p ef forts.  ss roughout  the  1950s  the nion  stressed gotiating e '' Th u ne th best  possible  age increases  nd  working  conditions  egardless w a r of  threatened nversions, nce heap  rates  ould  in o  way foreco si c w n stall tomation.  everance ay  clauses,  ublic  elations  ograms, au S p p r pr and  lobbying or rotective gislation  peared o be    practical f p le ap t a strategy  uring  this ransitional  riod. d t pe

Five  years ater, wever,  the  same committee  was forced o l ho t admit  that ll ypes  of  buildings, cluding  ospitals, d suca t in h ha cessfully nverted o  automatic ervice  nd  that egislative acco t s a l tion ad  failed  ompletely.  ducational programs  med at  oth h c E ai b union  members and  the enting  ublic  till peared o  the union r p s ap t to be n  effective fense gainst  isplacement.  A  job  of  salesa de a d " manship," s  the  committee  put  it,  ould encourage emaining a w r operators  o  perform heir  uties with  "high egree f  service" t t d a d o and might  influence  anagement to  expand  rather  han  elimim t nate  building  ervice  obs. he committee, ike he  labor oves j T l t m ment in  general,  proved  agmatic on  he  question f  automapr t o tion nd,  finally,  commended that the rinciple  f  severance a re " p o pay  or  conversion  ay  be  pursued nd  these  rograms e improved p a p b in  contract  lauses  n rder o  further  ase he ransitional bc i o t e t t pro lems occasioned y automatic nstallation. b i ''s6

It as  not  until  958  that ocal  32B began  to  publicize re w 1 L mo

widely ts  osition   worker  displacement. en realtor bert i p on Wh Al J.  Courtney,  ice-president    the  Cross  and  Brown Company, V of published  Operatorless  evators," amphlet hat  arotted  he " El a  p t p t elevator dustry's  aims f mproved  efficiency  d  lower osts, in cl o i an c David  Sullivan allenged e nderlying sumptions  f he roch th u as o t p automation  rgument. n  a  letter   Courtney,  he nion  leader a I to t u outlined  is ocal's  an o ndict e eal  state  ndustry blicly h l pl t i h r e i pu for ts  ack f  concern ith he uman costs f  automation.  uli l o w t h o S livan  oped  to lert le nting blic  hat  hey ere  paying igher h a i re pu t t w h rents or  decreased ervice  nd  sacrificing  curity r he  real f s a se fo t estate  ndustry's  nefit. n  the  last  nalysis,"  llivan  oted, i be "I a Su n "both enants  nd  workers re ffected-  e ormer ecause hey t a a a th f b t are eprived  f ervice  nd  the atter  cause hey ose  heir bs. d o s a l be t l t jo The only  one  who benefits,"    concluded,  is he  landlord. T he " t ''s Sullivan blicized ese  harges  n   letter   he pu th c i a tot New York  Herald Tribune and questioned  he  unregulated  ntroduction    autot i of mation. It  ould  be  deplorable  achines ecome the aster " w ifm b m rather  han he ervant  f  the eople,"  e  concluded,  [and]... t t s o p h " if utomation,  ike    Frankenstein,  rves  ventually ly o urn a l a se e on t t on and destroy  eople. Ss p ''

In 1959  ocal 2B mounted  an  "intensified  paign" o ake L 3 cam t m the  renting  ublic ware  of  what the  union  called  he  "grave p a t problem of  utomation  n  New  York City's  uilding  ervice  na i b s i dustry.  s9   a  letter  stributed partment  enants,  B's secre'' In di toa t 32 tary,  homas G. Young,  pointed out at  while  utomation  ay T th " a m be here  o  stay,  echanical  fficiency   o  substitute  r uman t m e isn fo h service. You  y  a  substantial t  o he andlord,"    noted,  and pa ren t t l he " therefore  ve very ight  o xpect  roper  ervice."  t  only ould ha e r t e p s No w "robot  cars" eplace uman  operators,  oung  explained,  ut r h Y b tenants  ould be increasingly  posed  to  danger. Not  a day w ex " passes,"   reiterated, thout  hocking  ewspaper tories out he "wi s n s ab serious  r  fatal  cidents.., tality, aults d  robberies at o ac bru ass an th occur n  apartment  uildings..,  re  service s been  urtailed i b whe ha c as  a  result  f  nstallation elf-service vators d  reduction o i of  s ele an in  the  number of  employees. 6° ''

32B,

sg"Automatics,"

Feb.,  1958, -5. 3

A number of  well nown personalities  lived  r  worked k who o in  buildings rviced  y  32B's  members added their  me to  the e b na cause. Ride n   self-service  vator? hould ay ot,"  osalind " i a ele I  s s n R Russell  nnounced o eporters   her ay  up to  arner  Brothers' a t r on w W offices  t  666  Fifth  venue:  "I  prefer  o  ride nly  in  elevators a A t o that ave  operators,"  d  added,  "union perators. 1  orothy h an o ''6D Kilgallen so ided he union's  blic relations  paign  when al a t pu cam she  called  or concrete tion"  urb he rime rate in ldings f " ac toc t c bui serviced  y  automatic  levators.   hink  t  s a  errible  ndition b e "It i i t co ...  where women  ...  have  to  ride ithout rotection  rom w p f criminals  nd  sex  perverts,"  e  announced. There  is othing a sh " n to  stop hese  ersons rom  stepping  nto    car ith   woman who t p f i a w a is lone nd  robbing r  attacking r.  '~2  uch  statements, ina a o he ' S re forcing  he union's  ssage  that  levator erators d ore  than t me e op di m move people  from  floor  o  floor,  ere  aimed  at  widening upt w s port  for  legislation  quiring  obby  attendants  n  self-service re l i buildings.

The union's  ublic  elations  mpaign, hile rawing  attenp r ca w d tion  o he light  f he nemployed  elevator erator, verthet t p o t u op ne less could  t low  down the eal  state dustry's  ans or odno s r e in pl f m ernization.  ter ew  York's ocony-Vacuum Building pened Af N S o in  the  mid-1950s,  and  its ank  of  thirty-four ratorless  rs b ope ca serving  orty-two ories monstrated  he eliability  utomatic f st de t r of  a service, servers  oted   decided  rend  n avor f utomation. ob n a t i f o a ~3 By the  1960s, elf-service,  ratorless  evators re  no  longer s ope el we a novelty  nd  the  public ot only  ccepted hem but  expected a n a t to  find hem  in he uildings   which  they ived  r worked.  rt t b in l o A ticles ke  The  Case  of he anishing  levator  an" chronicled li " t V E M the xtinction    this  lass  f uilding rvice  orkers.  Without e of c o b se w " a  doubt,"  he t New  York  Times noted, [the  levator erator  s] " e op i going  to  be  history-like  ce an-remembered only arely. thei m r He's  well n  his ay out f he uman scene ecause f  automao w o t h b o tion."  ensus  figures  onfirmed  his conclusion:  950, 2,511 C c t In  1 2 men and  1848  women  had  earned heir  iving erating evators t l op el

Oct.  1960,  14.

~2Ibid.,

in  New  York City. wenty years ater, e  census  counted  only T l th 10,052  male  and  950  female levator  perators-a  5%  drop.  4 e o 5 6

Although  automation ad  eliminated e levator  perator's h th e o job, he  1950s  construction om  helped o  cushion the  ffect t bo t of  labor isplacement  n  the  building  ervice  ndustry.   New d i s i In York City, he  number of  buildings  ncreased  ramatically  t i d be tween 1947  and 1960, nd  the  number of  maintenance,  orter, a p and  even  elevator starter , lso ncreased.  But  not  all  isjobs a i 65 d placed levator  perators  ould ualify  or hese  ervice bs,  se o c q f t s jo e pecially  nce,  y  the 960s,  levator erators re  generally der si b 1 e op we ol workers  with  few  transferable lls d  little  ucation.    "New ski an ed 6~ buildings..,  mand skilled n capable  f  monitoring  levator de me o e control  onsoles  nd maintaining  tomatic  levators d  power c a au e an equipment,"  n  article   he a int New  York  State  ndustrial  lletin I Bu pointed  ut, nd  most displaced  evators erators  acked hese o a el op l t skills. 67

Local  32B,  in  an  effort  o  protect  ts  embers,  joined ith t i m w the  Real state  dvisory oard  to devise lan hat ight  prove E A B a  p t m beneficial    building  wners  and union  embers alike. e  two to o m Th groups  surveyed mployment  possibilities    decided hat ise and t d placed levator  perators  ould,  ith some training,  mployed e o c w be  e as  handy  m e n -  an  occupation  till   emand.  With  the elp f s ind h o the  Apprentice ureau  of  the  State epartment  of  Labor,  32B B D and  the  Real  Estate  dvisory oard  developed   one  year racA B a p tical raining  ourse  in carpentry,  lumbing,  and painting. t c p Members of  the ocal  ho had  been  licensed   substitute  achers l w as te

~7"Helping  Its wn," O New  York  State  epartment  of abor  Industrial  lletin, D L Bu Oct.  1963,  12.

taught he  course  which  began  in  1963 and was funded  by the t Manpower Development  and  Retraining t.  Displaced  levator Ac e operators  nrolled  n  the ourse ere  eligible  r nemployment e i c w fo u compensation nd  up  to  $39  a  week in aintenance  llowance. a m a 6s

Local  32B was in  no  position   resist   subvert  he nstallato or t i tion f  automatic levators  nd other abor-saving uipment. o e a l eq In  order o  provide ts embers with  at  least  hort erm  aid, t t i m s t i cooperated  ith  the eal estate ustry  nd  negotiated smissal w r ind a i procedures,  etirement  lans, nd methods of  finding  mployr p a e ment for  displaced  orkers.   Given  its  arly  ggressive  truggle w 69 e a s to  organize  nskilled rvice  orkers, 2B's  experience  emonu se w 3 d strates e  limits  hat echnological  ange- specially tomath t t ch e au tion- laces n trade nions. Basically,"  e  study  of  technop o u " on logical  abor isplacement  oncluded,  [unions]  re ore  a  force d c " a m that  eacts  o utomation  han reates it,    their  eaction nters r t a t c and r ce about  one  concern:  hat  happens o the  an who loses  is ob?  7° w t m h j "

Local  32B's esponse  o utomation  ould e  termed  a  responr t a c b sible  n e -   the nion ttempted  o rotect  ome  jobs hrough  egiso u a t p s t l lation  lbeit  ithout uccess;  t uccessfully  gotiated rminaa w s i s ne te tion ay  and  pension rovisions, d  took  steps o  retrain me p p an t so of  those members ho could  fill isting bs n he uilding  erw ex jo i t b s vice ndustry/1  t the  same time, owever,  the  union  continued i A h to  organize emaining uilding  ervice  orkers  and eventually r b s w expanded  its  urisdiction he xtent  hat  f utomation  estroyed j to  t e t i a d the  elevator  perators' ion  it id  not  destroy  Local B. o un d 32

Despite heir  bvious ccommodation  to  automation,  levator t o a e operators  id ot  uncritically  ept  t.  Automation,"  ne  fearful d n acc i " o operator  rgued, is he  PUBLIC a " t ENEMY of  HUMANITY, a Mechanical  Monstrosity,  hich  must not  ever  Replace  or  Disw place uman  Beings."  nother  operator  oted It's  dirty  hame H A n " a s that hey  have  to  put  automatics  n to  et eople  out  of  work. t i l p He added  "They  tell  ou  it's ogress,  ut  progress  s ever anyy pr b i n thing  hat  hrows eople ut  of  work.  72 s David  Sullivan inted t t p o " A po

out  at  a congressional aring n  1961,  these uilding  ervice he i b s workers  had  a  right  o  question  he eaning  of  such  progress, t t m especially  cause hey ended o e  unemployed  for onger  eriods be t t t b l p than  other orkers. ullivan's  atistics icated  hat f  those w S st ind t o unemployed  service  orkers, 8.7% had been  out  of  work for w 1 fifteen   more  weeks,  while 1.7%  of  all  nemployed  had  been or 1 u jobless  hat ong. t l ~3

Certainly  oth  the SEIU  and  Local  32B took  the roblem b B p of  automation  nd  labor isplacement riously,  t  "progress" a d se bu had  undermined  the  strategies  at  rade nions ad  previously th t u h employed  to  protect  heir  embem.  As Sumner Slichter inted t m po out  in  1941, nions ave  three  hoices  hen confronting e nu h c w th i stallation  labor-saving  chnology: ey an  resist   obstruct of te th c or technological  ange, hey an  compete  with he achine  by  cutch t c t m ting heir  age rates,  r  they an  control  he se  of  technology t w o c t u once  it s n  place. i i TM

None of  these ptions pplied o  unions  like 2B-unions o a t 3 that epresented  nskilled  orkers  whose jobs  were not  transr u w formed  but  eliminated   technology  nd  who,  without pecial by a s training,  uld ot xpect o  find ther  ork.  Unionized levator co n e t o w e operators  ould ot  have  forestalled omation  y  lowering  age c n aut b w rates  r utting ck  on  their  emands-  automated levators  re o c ba d e we introduced  nto nion  and  non-union ities ike  ecause  they i u c al b eliminated en  the owest aid perator  nd  because he nterests ev l p o a t i of  the levator dustry  ictated is  hange. or was it SEIU e in d th c N B policy  o  oppose  automation--unions  d  not  want  to e  identit di b fied  s  opponents f  progress. e wish  to  make it  lear  hat  e a o "W c t w are  not  opposed  to  automation  n  itself," id  Sullivan  eiteri Dav r ated o  Congress:  We are,  owever, oncerned hat  he ntire t " h c t t e na tion hould hare n ts  enefits d  that  he ortion  f he opus s i i b an t p o t p lation versely fected   it  hould  eceive  pecial nsideration." ad af by s r s co But  Sullivan s not  convinced hat  he unrestricted ration wa t t " ope of  the conomic  system" ould olve he roblem  of  technologe c s t p ical  nemployment  and  he  looked o  the overnment o  address u t g t the  question  f  retraining  d  maintaining splaced  orkers. o an di w 7s

Local  32B's  experience ith  automation emonstrates hat w d t technological ange  not  only  threatens  he  displaced  orker's ch t w economic  security, t  weakens  a  union's  bility   protect  hat bu a to t security. spite he  local's ccessful  fforts   organize eemDe t su e to s ingly norganizable  orkers  and despite  uccessful ruggles  o u w s st t win a  living  age and  benefits  or nskilled, rginal orkers, w f u ma w this  nion  had  no  leverage  hen industry  utomated levator ru w a e se vice. utomated  technology ismantled he  structure  at ad A d t th h empowered this nion,  and counteracted  he  union's bility u t a to command  respect  nd consideration thin he  industry.  utoa wi t A mation  made it lear  hat ab~  and  capital re  not  equal ppoc t l we o nents  in  the  uilding  ervice  ndustry. e rise f  the operatorb s i Th o less  levator sarmed he levator  perators' union,    left  ocal e di t e o and L 32B no choice ut  to  accept he  change  and  move on to reener b t g organizing  ields. f

The social  mplications   the introduction utomation  nto i of of  a i the  workplace  reach  beyond questions f  profit  nd loss or  a o a f particular  dustry, d  beyond  questions  f  unemployment for in an o individual rkers:  eplacing  en and  women  with  machines  prowo r m tects  anagerial  rerogative d  promises o  return  nilateral  nm p an t u co trol  f achinery o  capital.    the ame  time utomation  eakens o m t At s a w a  union's ability  ight  or ts  embers'  interests  d  thus ullito  f f i m an n fies he  social  ontract  mplicit  n  the  theory f  collective rt c i i o ba gaining.  ot  only levator  perators  n ew York,  but  machinists N e o i N in  Connecticut,  nd longshoremen  on the  west  coast, mong a a others,  ave  learned he  hard  lesson hat utomation imits  he h t t a l t strategies  ailable   even  the trongest   unions.   Labor-saving av to s of 76 technology  ot  only ransforms  ndustry  ut  undermines he asis n t i b t b of  labor-industrial  ations,  d shapes  the  structure   future rel an of economic opportunity.