## AbsorbingWaste, Displacing Labor: Family, Environment, and the Disposable Diaper in the 1970s

## Abstract

Between 1965 and 1980, disposable diapers became the norm among middle-class American families, altering resource flows as they became more popular. Diapers crafted from wood and water of the United States, primarily from the South-rather than that region's cotton-covered infant bottoms. The turn to single-use diapers also transformed knowledge production. For the first half of the twentieth century, women had carried out the interrelated tasks of making diapers, caring for children, and laundering diapers. This work informed women's understandings of children's bodies and the material world. By the 1950s, prefolded diapers and home washing machines simplified the acts of diaper creation and maintenance and associated this work ever more strongly with the household. In the 1970s,

Kendra Smith-Howard, 'Absorbing Waste, Displacing Labor: Family, Environment, and the Disposable Diaper in the 1970s,' Environmental History 26 (2021): 207-230

economic pressures and feminism prompted families to rethink the way they cared for infants' wastes as disposable diapers simplified household work, and shifting cultural norms encouraged their adoption. Thus, families embraced them. The work of maintaining diapers was replaced with the work of disposal. This history of the disposable diaper centers on reproductive work, tracing the tasks inherent in diapering as well as the shifting social norms and codes that legitimized disposable diapers. Ultimately, the disposable diaper not only offers lessons about the costs of a disposable society but also new insights about changing dynamics of family life and their impact on the environment in the 1970s.

Introduced in an era that generated disposable products ranging from paper cups to sanitary napkins, single-use diapers gained traction as commercial goods comparatively slowly. 1 As early as 1911, the Sears catalog advertised paper liners to be worn inside a cloth diaper and thrown away or burned when soiled, helping mothers avoid 'the unpleasant feature of baby's laundry.' In 1936, Johnson &amp; Johnson introduced Chux single-use diapers. 2 But sales languished. From the 1930s through the 1960s, disposable diapers represented an occasional purchase-appropriate for travelling and trips to the doctor but not everyday use. A 1948 Chux advertisement proved typical in underscoring the usefulness of disposable diapers for vacationing mothers; under the headline 'When we Go Bye-Bye Mommie buys me Chux,' the advertisement boasted that the disposable was 'America's favorite vacation diaper for years and years' (figure 1). 3 Eighteen years later, the Sears catalog still identified them as 'an extra convenience during traveling and visiting.' 4 Over the course of the 1970s, however, middle-class American families turned to disposable diapers for everyday use. Whereas just 8 percent of American families used disposable diapers in 1969, by 1980 that number had reached 65 percent. 5

As they became normative, disposable diapers wrought environmental consequences with serious ramifications for the nation's waterways, forests, and landfills. This article follows the tradition of commodity-chain analysis in environmental history by tracing the environmental footprint of diaper manufacture. 6 But it departs from such studies by examining the knowledge-creating work processes of diapering alongside the materials used to do it. It traces not simply how the material of the diaper changed over time but also how the work of diapering was redistributed. As parents began using singleuse diapers, they delegated tasks once performed in the home to

Figure 1. As indicated in this 1948 advertisement for Johnson &amp; Johnson's disposable diaper, Chux, paper diapers were considered appropriate only for occasional use. Credit: National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution, Archives Center.

<!-- image -->

Iofants' and Children s Review 1948 Drug Topics May, 1948 May.

Ad No. 94179

caregivers, paper manufacturers, and, ultimately, to the forests and /C18 streams that supplied these factories.

Between the single-use diaper's introduction in 1936 and its widespread adoption in the United States in the 1970s, the act of diapering remained a series of acts of labor, not merely of consumption . Previously, women made diapers, remade them to suit the individual preferences and bodily shapes of their children, and performed the tasks of laundering them. Diaper users purchased goods to aid in the act of diapering-like creams to protect delicate skin and hampers to hold soiled cloths-but such purchases were tools for diapering, akin to paint and a ladder for housepainters. It took until the 1970s for disposable diapers to take off in part because single-use diaper manufacturers conceived of diapering as an act of consumption and disposal, whereas users saw diapers as objects of creation and reuse.

The work of diapering built women's knowledge of nature. 7 As they changed diapers, parents interacted with children as biological beings. As women laundered, they sought to maximize diapers' exposure to direct sun to sanitize them. The disposable diaper reorganized this work, but not immediately; reorganizing and redefining the work process of managing baby wastes started before the solution to baby's messes became a new commodity. Thus, the disposable diaper paradoxically took root during a decade of environmental consciousness because the 1970s brought about new ways of understanding and assigning work within families. Disposable diapers not only allowed American families to manage babies' messes but also provided a tidy solution to the pressing challenges of the 1970s. They arose as more families struggled to achieve an equitable balance of home and paid work and turned to professional childcare.

As families turned to disposable diapers, pulp and paper companies managed the materials necessary to create diapers: water, wood pulp, nonwoven sheeting, and, eventually, polyacrylite gel. Capitalintensive pulp and paper manufacture concentrated waste, generated scrutiny, and prompted advanced research on water pollution. As the disposable diaper became a consumer product, these companies extracted the tacit knowledge and maintenance work of diapering once performed by women. Whereas mothers had used their observations of children's behavior to reshape or fold diapers to conform to individual preferences, pulp and paper companies sought to streamline production and augment sales via product development teams that analyzed fiber absorbency and standardized diaper form.

The history of the disposable diaper underscores how extensively the materials that Americans have used in their homes have reflected the intersection of three interlocking sets of networks: family networks, labor networks, and environmental networks. Changes in any one of these networks reconfigured the others. During the 1970s, each of these networks experienced significant changes. Historians

have done much to reveal the transformations in family life, the effects of deindustrialization and weakening labor protections, and changes in environmental policy in the decade. But telling these stories in isolation, historians have inadvertently distorted them to some degree, neglecting their overlaps and reciprocal transformations. The case of the disposable diaper, then, helps to reveal the intersections between family life, labor, and environmental transformation in fresh ways. In so doing, it offers a salient reminder of how identities, labor, and, indeed, the human experience writ large are inextricably bound up with the natural world.

## THE WORK OF DIAPERING

As the bumper sticker says, 'shit happens.' Among the very young and the very old, it happens unpredictably, adding extra burdens for those responsible for managing these wastes. 8 Cultural practices vary. In China, for instance, caregivers monitor babies for cues and hold a bare-bottomed infant over a vessel to collect the output. 9 Before the widespread use of the disposable diaper, the work of managing babies' wastes among middle-class families in the United States rested in three tasks: creating diapers, changing the baby, and maintaining and cleaning soiled diapers. Women nearly always performed all three of these tasks-sewing, childcare, and laundry work-even when they were undertaken outside the home.

Diapers constituted a critical part of the baby's layette. For much of the twentieth century, diapers were less a packaged good than a material fashioned in the home by the person who changed them: mothers. The absorbent core of a diaper remained remarkably consistent: layers of cotton cloth-in the form of birdseye (which was especially absorbent), cotton gauze (which dried quickly), or flannelette (which absorbed and wicked wetness). 10 Only through women's labor of cutting, hemming, and folding did lengths of cloth become uniquely suited for the purpose. Such skills were assumed and ordinary. As late as 1964, the Sears catalog noted that from a ten-yard length of fabric, 'an average woman who sews can machine-hem 13 diapers in about 45 minutes.' 11 After hemming, users could customize the diaper to the needs of the child, folding to suit the anatomy and activity levels.

While crafting diapers at home was still commonplace in the 1950s and 1960s, diaper manufacturers saw increased sales with the postwar baby boom. The Kendall Company, whose Curity brand diapers enjoyed the largest market share of any cloth diaper brand, noted in its 1961 annual report that 'more diapers were sold than in any year in Kendall History.' 12 By the 1950s and 1960s, consumers could purchase 'pre-folded' diapers, large squares of cotton material manufactured in layers to offer greater absorbency where needed. Sears also

sold diapers pretreated with hexachlorophene (a germicide) 'so there's no need to wash before first use.' 13 Consumers, of course, paid a heftier price for diapers that came hemmed, pre-folded, or pretreated and so measured the increased cost of diapers against mothers' time.

The other component of the diaper was a waterproof diaper cover, which, in contrast to the absorbent core, was always more likely to be purchased than sewn. In the 1910s, Sears advertised rubber-coated cambric sheeting used as lap protectors underneath a diapered baby. By the 1920s, rubberized cotton or silk diaper covers had elastic leg openings, and in the 1940s and 1950s, the covers incorporated synthetic materials such as vinyl or plastic, rather than rubber, as a waterproof barrier. Unlike the absorbent core, diaper covers were optional. Baby guides recommended against their use except for dress-up occasions because they trapped moisture close to the skin and thus encouraged diaper rash. 14

While demands placed on mothers' sewing skills lessened during the 1960s, the same could not be said of the second task in managing babies' wastes: diapering. Diapering required greater skill than is often recognized. In many ways, diapering is a skill akin to those more commonly profiled by environmental historians of work. Just as explorers navigating a canoe altered their strokes to traverse rapids in a river, or miners in a shaft judged their risk based on the odors emitted, so also did mothers charged with keeping children clean observe, feel, smell, and react to a natural process: a baby's elimination. Changing diapers required careful observation and tactile knowledge. Parents had to know the form of a child's body and carefully observe their habits and behavior. A surreptitious squat or gurgly tummy indicated that a mess awaited. Mothers sniffed, inspected, or ran their fingers along a diaper's edges. If a fresh diaper was merited, the changer folded cloth to pad the child's body in the right places. This, too, required bodily knowledge; one folded diapers differently for boys or girls, newborns and toddlers, crawlers or walkers.

The act of the diaper change itself required more knowledge and skill still. Diapers required careful extraction to ensure contents did not smear on the baby's skin, clothes, or surrounding walls and objects. Often, one hand lifted the body, while the other swiftly removed any taint from the thick folds of chubby baby skin. Mothers inspected babies' skin for signs of irritation and applied ointments, creams, or powders. Sometimes they examined the contents of the diaper to assess the state of the baby's gastrointestinal system. They reached for pins to fasten the diaper, careful not to poke or stick them into wiggly limbs. And throughout this entire process, mothers carried out emotional work-dangling a toy, playing peek-a-boo, or singing songs to calm a discomforted infant or attempt (often futilely) to still a squirmy toddler eager to run away naked. 15 Like other baby

care, the act of diaper changing was rooted in sensory embodied experiences: touching babies' skin, smelling their poo, and listening to gurgly tummies.

While the act of changing a diaper required the same skill set from the 1910s to the 1960s, shifting expert advice about infant toileting practices burdened mid-century mothers with more diaper work, not less. In the 1920s, experts urged mothers to toilet train babies while still in infancy. 16 A scientific schedule meant fewer interruptions from babies' unpredictable bowels and also promised a smaller laundry pile. In the 1929 version of its guide Infant Care , the US Children's Bureau concluded that 'almost any baby can be trained so that there are no more soiled diapers to wash after he is 6 to 8 months old.' 17 The impulse to encourage babies to become more regular and orderly corresponded with efforts to make other natural forces more regular. A modern baby was one disciplined to adhere to a mother's schedule rather than responding to the erratic 'call of nature.' 18 By the 1940s and 1950s, experts recommended postponing toilet training to toddlerhood and told parents to focus on children's psychological development, not the chore of laundering diapers. 19 Cornell Home Economics researchers in 1947 cautioned: 'It is only human to think about saving laundry, but try not to let it be important.' 20 The 1951 edition of Infant Care reminded mothers: 'What you're after is not having fewer diapers to wash, but having a baby who feels like working with you instead of against you.' 21 Hence, whereas the shift from bottle to 'natural' breastfeeding granted greater authority to mothers, toilet training advice strengthened the power of children and heightened the piles of dirty diapers. 22

Therefore, laundering constituted the final stage of the work of diapering. Diapers had to be washed separately from other laundry and with greater frequency. Prior to the adoption of indoor plumbing and automatic washing machines, laundry involved heating and hoisting water and heaving and hanging heavy clothes to dry. Diaper laundry required additional tasks-scraping waste into the toilet, soaking with borax prior to washing, boiling for sanitization purposes, and extra rinsing to completely remove detergent that could irritate babies' skin. 23 Sheets, blankets, and baby clothing also became soiled and wet, adding to the laundry burden.

The vast majority of mothers laundered diapers themselves, especially in the postwar era, when home washing machines became widely employed. While sales of washing machines paused during World War II, appliance sales climbed steadily after 1945. By 1961, 67 percent of American households had washing machines, most of them acquired in the previous decade. 24 Washing machines simplified laundry by putting electric and fossil fuel energy, rather than muscle power, to work, but laundry work remained physical labor. One 1945 study found that, even when their homes were equipped

with washing machines, Illinois farm women walked between three-and-a-half and five miles while laundering a typical week's laundry. 25 Until the 1970s, fewer than half of American households had a clothes dryer, so women continued to hang diapers and wait for the sun and wind to dry them. 26 Once dried, diapers needed to be taken down from the line, folded, and put away to be reused.

Due to its drain on women's time and energy, laundering diapers was the task of diaper work most often outsourced or automated. Some, especially in the South, hired laundresses, though their numbers diminished as power laundries and home washing machines became more prevalent. 27 Women in rural areas sometimes reassigned household work to family members or neighbors, at least for the period immediately following childbirth. 28 Power laundries began to offer specialized diaper service in the 1930s, but, even at their peak, such services only reached 7 percent of families with diapered infants. 29 Disposable labor undergirded the reusable diaper.

Advertisers marketed washing machines to new parents facing the chore of cleaning diapers. A 1956 McCall's photo-essay titled 'Automation: Babies Demand It' likened purchasing a washing machine to the mechanization of labor in industry. Its author, Elizabeth Sweeney Herbert, coached: 'Have a machine take over a job that it can do as well as she, freeing her to do the job no one else can dogiving her baby the unhurried care and affection he's entitled to.' 30 Ads depicting mother's work in changing a baby as irreplaceable, but describing the act of diaper maintenance as push-button, encouraged readers to focus on childcare elements of the baby-changing process. This emphasis on diapering as care work began to redefine the labor of diapering so that the materials used to carry it out could change without disrupting the 'essential' parts of the process.

Between the 1910s and the 1960s, the stages of diaper work (preparation, baby care, and laundry work) were intimately connected. An insufficiently sanitized diaper could chap a baby's tenderest parts, inspiring a parent to wash diapers more thoroughly. Watching a child squirm out of a diaper might inspire its changer to improvise a new wiggle-proof fold. Early efforts to reform diapering, such as experts' recommendations to reduce the labor of diaper maintenance by toilet training infants, recognized the reflexive, intertwined processes of diaper care, diaper preparation, and maintenance. Postwar appliance manufacturers, by contrast, encouraged consumers to separate these tasks conceptually. Their advertisements emphasized women's work interacting with children but minimized mothers' labor to prepare diapers for wash, hang them to dry, or modify diaper design. These hidden steps were the very ones that informed mothers' understanding of the bodies of babies and often required trips outdoors. As care work became the focus, the technological and environmental systems inherent in supporting this intimate parent-child interaction receded

from view. Changing the material with which parents diapered children shifted parts of this reflexive cycle outside of the household. Recovering the work process in which reusable goods circulated is essential to understanding the circumstances of their adoption and their effects.

## DISPOSABLE/INCOME

The shift to disposable diapers unfolded swiftly between 1966 and 1980. Between 1968 and 1971, three major disposable diaper brands-Procter &amp; Gamble's Pampers, Scott Paper's BabyScotts, and Kimberly-Clark's Kimbies-entered national distribution. Whereas the disposable diaper industry yielded $10 million in sales in 1966, the sector's profits reached $200 million by 1970. 31 Textile manufacturers and department stores alike saw the impact. In 1966, when Sears advertised baby layettes, all of them included two dozen cotton diapers and two or three pairs of waterproof pants. Only one layette featured disposable diapers. 32 By 1978, Sears layettes contained just six cotton pre-folds. 33 In 1965, seventy-six thousand bales of cotton were destined for diaper production; by 1974, just thirty-eight thousand bales of cotton were. 34

Neither lower cost nor superior design wholly explains disposable diapers' increased sales. By 1966, disposable diapers sold for roughly five-and-a-half cents per diaper, half the price they cost a decade earlier. Even so, this price exceeded that of diaper service (3.5 cents per diaper) and far exceeded the cost of home-laundered diapers (0.5 to 1.5 cents per diaper). 35 These disposable diapers largely mirrored those of cotton diapers in form and shape, but paper diapers underperformed in function. Early models of disposable diapers were flat sheets of nonwoven paper material, with polyethylene backing to prevent leakage. Like cloth diapers, they required diaper pins to close (figure 2). Mothers who tested disposables in 1971 for Consumer Reports reported that 'the diapers tended to tear in use; they bunched up; and they sometimes shredded and stuck to baby.' 36 Single-use diapers also presented disposal problems. Trash cans swelled with stench as parents awaited garbage pickup. Parents who flushed diapers down the toilet confronted clogged pipes and sewage backups, especially if they depended on septic tanks. The practical-minded editors of Consumer Reports seemed bewildered, writing in 1971 that 'one wonders what . . . can be so appealing about a product that's relatively expensive to begin with, is useful for only a brief period, and then is rather hard to get rid of gracefully.' 37

Disposable diapers appealed less because of their material attributes than for the ways in which they made it possible to redistribute labor. The moment in which the disposable diaper took off corresponded

Figure 2. As this page of the 1966 Sears catalog illustrates, early models of disposable diapers mimicked cloth diapers. They were flat and had to be folded and pinned to fit a child's body. Credit: Department of Special Collections and University Archives, W. E. B. Du Bois Library, University of Massachusetts Amherst.

<!-- image -->

with major changes in the lives of American women. Mothers shouldered greater economic responsibilities in the 1970s than ever before. As inflationary pressures tightened family budgets, fewer families relied on one wage earner to meet family needs. Women with very young children entered the workforce in record numbers. The percentage of working mothers of children under three (children likely to be diapered) steadily rose between 1970 and 1980-from 26 percent to 41.5 percent. 38 By 1985, women's earnings accounted for 3040 percent of family income. 39 These structural changes occurred in tandem with a feminist movement. 40

The task of diapering babies touched two key fronts in feminist politics: the fairness and equity of housework and the politics of childcare. First, diapers stood as a symbol of the unequal distribution of housework. Women resented shouldering the burden of necessary household tasks that offered few outlets for creativity or intellectual fulfillment. Thus, women liberation activists who marched in Rochester, New York, in August 1970 dumped diapers alongside bras as 'symbols of women's oppression.' 41 Ms. Magazine reader Irene Sanders expressed her newfound feminism by refusing diaper duty: 'My husband came into the kitchen to announce Lori had a dirty diaper. I looked up from my Ms. and said 'so change it.'' 42 Household showdowns like this one prompted husbands and wives to renegotiate the terms of household work. 43 By streamlining a tedious household task, disposable diapers could temper family conflicts. 44 One survey of sixteen hundred households from eleven states found a

statistically significant increase in the rate of disposable diaper use among working mothers and concluded that 'employed wives/mothers used disposable diapers as a strategy to buy time, thus eliminating time-consuming laundering and folding of cloth diapers.' 45

A second critical issue of feminism-the politics of childcare-also shaped the adoption of the disposable diaper. Although conservatives continued to characterize mothers' entry into the workforce and reliance on childcare as an assault on the family, by the 1970s, the social norms, professional guidelines, and state laws that previously discouraged and even prohibited mothers from enrolling infants and toddlers in day care centers began to disappear. 46 By 1978, only Utah, Maine, and Montana still explicitly forbid the enrollment of children under two in childcare centers. 47

Day care centers favored disposable diapers over cloth. 48 As Al Griffin's 1973 How to Start and Operate a Day Care Home advised, 'children will use up an unbelievable amount of launderables during any given day. Most day care operators cut down on the amount somewhat by replacing cloth diapers with disposable diapers (some day care homes make the parents provide them).' 49 Day care licensing codes endorsed the practice. Minnesota's law stated that, if diapers were provided by the center, they should be disposable. Some states required day care centers using cloth diapers to be equipped with laundry facilities. Even the most minimal regulations called for separate, plastic-lined containers for each child's soiled diapers. The labor, space, and equipment costs for cloth diapers made disposable diapers substantially more attractive in institutional settings. 50

While, in theory, parents enrolling children in day care only delegated care work, in practice, parents sending children to paid caregivers also ceded control over the materials in which they were diapered. In a 1972 issue of Momma , Carol Powers described her daily routine at day care drop off. She wrote that 'the lady who takes care of her comes running with a disposable diaper to catch her morning bowel movement in something which can be thrown away. She toddles off to spend the rest of the day in plastic. At night, we go back to my way, cloth. It is a small compromise, one of many.' 51 Parents could attempt to find a day care center whose values (environmental, political, or religious) and practices corresponded with their own, but utilizing paid institutional caregivers reduced parents' influence. Within these settings, women of color remained saddled with diaper duty for they were twice as often hired as day care workers as their Euro-American counterparts. These paid workers took on the responsibility of diapering, but like parents who relied on day care, they did not enjoy full authority over the materials or practices that childcare centers used. 52

Like day care centers, hospital maternity departments introduced disposable diapers and implicitly endorsed their use. Paper companies

sought the incorporation of single-use diapers in medical settings as a way to bolster the product's legitimacy and advertise it to new parents. Paper companies promised their products would cut costs and reduce risks of infection. The adoption of disposable diapers in hospital settings in the 1970s marked the culmination of a broader shift to disposables in medicine. During the 1950s, hospitals started using many of the disposable technologies that were first developed for combat use, such as disposable syringes and needles. By the 1960s, hospital managers eager to cut labor costs and the risk of crosscontamination adopted sterilized, disposable kits for the operating room, paper sheets and pillowcases for patient rooms, and even paper cups and napkins in employee cafeterias. Pampers began advertising to hospital executives in 1969, and, by 1971, Kimberly-Clark's Kimbies did too. 53 With the greater use of disposables came a greater burden of waste. By the early 1970s, hospital patients generated nearly four times more trash daily than the average citizen. 54 Hospital administrators cut costs by eliminating laundry workers and dishwashers while spending money installing incinerators and garbage grinders or paying for more frequent visits by private waste haulers. 55

## ABSORBING THE IMPACT

Disposable diapers did not replace labor; they dis-placed it. Their adoption shifted diaper work from the cotton and textile supply chain to pulp and paper manufacturers. Pulp and paper engineers took up the design work of diapering from members of households. And, finally, because paper manufacture relied more heavily on water and pulp, it made more work for nature. By the late 1970s, the nation's forests and streams-especially those of the South-soaked up the environmental impact of diaper manufacture, for as Americans sought to contain their babies' wastes in fluff pulp-stuffed disposable diapers, pulp and paper mills poured organic wastes into waterways.

The shift to single-use diapers also rebuilt the pathways of knowledge gained through cloth diapering. Mothers using cloth diapers had a feedback loop to apply knowledge gained through experience; parents reacted to a leaky diaper by tightening the leg fold to better fit a baby's body or added an extra absorbent insert before putting a child down for a nap. These customizations to fit circumstance defined parents as makers, or at least as tinkerers, rather than simply as product consumers.

Paper companies put product engineers, rather than parents, in charge of diaper development. Product engineers translated tacit knowledge into technical specifications. Sometimes paper companies

explicitly acknowledged mothers' expertise. Scott Paper, for instance, hired Marion Donovan, whose design experience grew out of motherhood. Frustrated by leaky diapers, Donovan developed a diaper cover, patented it, and parlayed her expertise into becoming a product consultant. 56 Yet product development was distinct from the diaper tinkering that once took place in the home. Unlike parents crafting a product for a specific, known user, paper companies standardized their product for babies generally. The lifeless, infant-sized dolls of Weyerhaeuser Paper's Kent, Washington, diaper-testing room, for instance, were identically shaped and sized (figure 3). Single-use diapers were standardized products, designed to suit babies generally, not specific individual children's habits and bodies. As the skill of diapering became extracted from the process of childcare and patented within the product, diaper users became consumers. 57

Unlike reusable diapers, disposables came from pulp and paper mills rather than textile mills and from wood fibers rather than cotton ones. By the 1970s, most pulp originated in southern pine forests, where largely African American logging crews felled trees destined for papermaking. Pulpwood cutters toiled long hours for low wages paid by wood dealers-a subcontracting system that shielded mills from the expense of financing equipment and from the responsibility of worker protection in a hazardous business. Once delivered to mill woodyards, workers sorted, sawed, and chipped the wood to be cooked into pulp. Inside the plant, white operators oversaw machines that rolled pulp into paper. Finally, workers oversaw the paper's conversion into specialized products, from cardboard boxes to fluff pulp, which was the filling for single-use diapers. 58

At the very moment when disposable diaper sales increased, the pulp and paper industry grew in the South, while mills shuttered in the Northeast and Pacific Northwest. 59 Labor historians have identified workers' activism as the driving motivation for these relocations rather than proximity to markets, raw materials, or skilled labor. 60 To be sure, labor was not inconsequential. Historians have long noted that industries in the South paid workers lower wages than their peers in other regions of the United States. 61 As the Kendall Company sought to expand production of disposable diapers to compete with Procter &amp; Gamble and Kimberly-Clark in 1971, the company scaled up its non-union plant in Bethune, South Carolina, instead of a unionized one in Windham, Connecticut. 62 But high unionization rates within the pulp and paper industry moderated wage differentials between southern workers and those in other regions and only dipped after 1986. 63

Further, in the case of pulp and paper manufacture, the environment still mattered a great deal. Trees regenerated more quickly in the South's warm climate, shortening the time between tree planting and harvest, which created a more abundant wood supply.

Figure 3. Weyerhaeuser Paper Company carried out its diaper product development at its Kent, Washington, Diaper Research Center, pictured here. Credit: Forest History Society.

<!-- image -->

Wilderness designations restricted logging, especially in the Pacific states, which increased supply costs. Further, as regulations against water pollution toughened in the 1970s, many companies preferred building new plants to retooling old ones, which enhanced the southern advantage.

As pulp and paper mills built and enlarged southern paper mills, they sent more wastes into southeastern waterways. To be sure, cotton diapers' environmental impacts had also been felt in this region. Southeastern cotton farmers relied heavily on organochlorine insecticides, exposing wildlife and African American cultivators alike to their health effects. 64 But while both cotton and paper manufacture were water intensive, pulp and paper mills had a more concentrated impact on streams and waterways. In 1977, pulp and paper mills used 1.9 trillion gallons of water. 65 Pulp mills returned this water to streams laced with pollutants, such as broken-down wood fibers and sugars and pulping and bleaching chemicals. Wood sugars expelled into rivers fed bacteria, which reduced the amount of oxygen in the water for fish and other wildlife in streams. 66 The industry was responsible for a quarter of the nation's industrial wastewater emissions. 67

In the early 1970s, Congress pressed pulp and paper makers to reduce water pollution. The need for pollution control was especially acute in southern states. There, as historian William Bryan elucidates, state and local governments often courted pulp and paper manufacturers, believing the industry promised greater environmental and

economic permanence than extractive logging or subsistence farming. 68 Southern lawmakers incentivized development with lax environmental laws. The history of the mill that provided fluff pulp for Procter &amp; Gamble's Pampers provides a useful example. In 1947, to lure the Procter &amp; Gamble's subsidiary Buckeye Cellulose to the region, municipal leaders of Perry, Florida, asked state legislators to designate Taylor County an 'industrial county.' The resulting legislation specifically defined the Fenholloway River as a waste stream, stating: 'Any manufacturing or industrial plant is empowered to discharge and deposit sewage, industrial and chemical wastes and effluents, or any of them, into the waters of the Fenholloway River and the waters of the Gulf of Mexico into which said river flows.' This designation meant that the county's economic status outweighed and superseded any environmental or public health protections. 69 The legislation passed unanimously, and, in 1954, Buckeye Cellulose opened its mill, which was expanded in 1958 and again in 1964 (figure 4). By the end of the decade, the plant was the primary source for Procter &amp; Gamble's pulp fluff for diapers. 70 In the late 1960s, Buckeye Cellulose provided an aerated lagoon to treat effluents and limit oxygen depletion from its discharges. 71 But since the Buckeye Cellulose mill used nearly all of the Fenholloway's flow, nearly all of the water downstream from the mill was pulp mill effluent.

By the 1970s and 1980s, the coffee-colored waters of the Fenholloway revealed disturbing clues about the ecological costs of unabated effluent. Scientists in the early 1970s who compared aquatic life in the Fenholloway with a neighboring stream found just three species of fish in the polluted areas of the Fenholloway, whereas a nearby stream had twenty-seven fish species present and four times as many aquatic invertebrates as the Fenholloway. The scientists concluded: 'The evidence is clear . . . that the Fenholloway River and its associated marshes have been so contaminated by pulp mill wastes that little in the way of free-swimming forms of life have been able to survive.' 72

The fish that remained in the river manifested effects of decades of exposure to mill pollution. Pulp mill effluent is rich in chemical compounds like pine sterols. When sterol-heavy effluent enters settling ponds, soil bacteria synthesize sterols from these compounds into androstenedione. Thus, by the 1980s, disproportionate numbers of the Fenholloway's female mosquito fish had elongated anal fins, a phenomenon attributable to the higher than normal readings of androstenedione. 73 Like the endocrine-disrupting synthetic chemicals examined by Nancy Langston and Jody Roberts, androstenedione alters wildlife reproduction. 74

Concerns about wildlife helped build the case for passage of the Clean Water Act, which brought greater national enforcement power

Figure 4. Procter &amp; Gamble manufactured southern pine into the pulp that stuffed diapers in this plant near Foley, Florida. Credit: Charles Lee Barron, 'Pulpwood Piled Up Outside the Buckeye Cellulose Plant, Foley, Florida,' 1963, State Archives of Florida.

<!-- image -->

and uniformity to water protection laws. 75 After its passage, however, industries continued to relocate to regions that had not penalized polluters as stridently. When pulp and paper companies of the Pacific Northwest faced the prospect of retrofitting older mills to meet federal water protection standards, many industry leaders elected to construct new mills in the South instead. 76 By 1960, for instance, Washington's Puget Sound was home to seven pulp mills, three of which supplied diaper manufacturers. 77 Washington's officials were

more attentive to the environmental effects of the industry in the 1960s than Florida's officials. In 1961, Washington Governor Albert Rossellini asked the Federal Water Pollution Control Administration to conduct a study of pollution and its effects on Puget Sound. The resulting 1967 study tied pulp mill waste to higher injury and mortality rates of juvenile salmon and stated that paper mill sludge suffocated crustaceans, mollusks, starfish, and sea anemone as it accumulated on the ocean floor. 78 Consequently, in 1969, when Puget Sound paper mills applied for pollution permits, state regulators used the study's findings to press manufacturers to adopt farreaching pollution controls to reduce mill effluents and remove sludge by March 1972.

In January 1972, two mills in Everett, Washington, operated by Simpson-Lee and Weyerhaeuser, announced they would close their Washington mills rather than invest capital in mill improvements to control pollution. Weyerhaeuser, for instance, pegged the costs of rebuilding the mill or installing equipment that would evaporate and burn waste at $15 million or $2.5 million, respectively. 79 Instead of making these investments, Weyerhaeuser relocated. It shuttered its mill in Everett and opened a new mill along the Neuse River in New Bern, North Carolina. This mill absorbed the responsibility for the company's rapidly growing diaper trade, which earned the company $20 million in 1970, and was positioned for growth or, as the company's newspaper put it in 1971, 'it's not a business that shows signs of bottoming out even if the product does go down the drain in the end.' 80 Fluff pulp to stuff Procter &amp; Gamble's Pampers constituted half of the mill's output. Eventually, Weyerhaeuser not only marketed pulp to Procter &amp; Gamble but also manufactured diapers under a private label. 81

Since pulp and paper mills used an extraordinary amount of water and wood, management decisions about plant siting carried environmental consequences for decades. But as plants moved South, deindustrialization also shaped family decisions about how to meet economic needs. Nationally, eleven million workers lost employment due to plant closings or relocation, and families who lost jobs through plant closings and relocations often responded by sending women into the paid labor force, increasing the likelihood that they would turn to time-saving technologies like disposable diapers. 82

## CONCLUSION

Environmental scholars tend to treat the consumer as a trigger, whose behavior at the point of sale initiates a cascade of environmental consequences. This tendency neglects to embed consumers' behavior within the context of family and political economy and

misses the critical role of household labor in the adoption of material goods. By 1980, more than half of American parents used disposable diapers to keep children clean and dry, but the transition from cloth to disposable diaper cannot be explained by focusing on the decisions that consumers made at the cash register.

The rise of the single-use diaper stemmed from a host of decisions that stretched beyond the point of sale, and historians seeking to understand the substantial environmental legacy of disposable diapers should recognize those decisions. Within households, women and their partners made family choices about how to balance paid and household work. Within institutions, day care licensing boards set rules that prized disposability, and hospital administrators cut labor costs for laundry work and built bigger disposal bins. In public life, state and federal legislators made decisions about how much state support to grant families and how to shape and enforce water pollution laws. In business, pulp and paper manufacturers sought to minimize pollution control costs. These broader social decisions about how to value and distribute the work of the household, how to ensure families' economic security, and how to protect the nation's waters and forests defined and circumscribed the arena in which consumers acted. Decisions about diapers were woven into the nation's political economy.

Single-use diapers flourished in the 1970s because they addressed the competing pulls on women as mothers, partners, and workers. By forgoing the work of designing and maintaining cloth diapers, mothers could pursue remunerative labor and meet their socially sanctioned role of caring for children. The dirty work of diapering did not disappear, however. It merely shifted course, moving from the unrecognized work of the household to neglected rivers like the Fenholloway. Remaking our throwaway society will require not simply reorganizing and replacing its material supply chains but also confronting and recognizing the labor necessary to make a more sustainable way possible.

Kendra Smith-Howard is associate professor of history at University at Albany (State University of New York). She is writing an environmental history of the changing environmental footprint of cleaning up, tentatively titled More Work for Nature.

## Notes

I am grateful to the Forest History Society, Western Washington University's Center for Pacific Northwest Studies, Lemelson Center-National Museum of American History, and the University at Albany for supporting research reflected in this article. I would also like to thank editors Mark Hersey and Stephen Brain and two anonymous reviewers for their comments, some of which will be more fully reflected in

future publications. For valuable feedback on earlier versions, I thank Tim Borstlemann, Eric Hintz, and especially Susan Strasser.

- 1 Nancy Tomes, Gospel of Germs: Men, Women, and the Microbe in American Life (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998), 180-81, 250-51; Susan Strasser, Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash (New York: Metropolitan Books, 1999), 162-82; Jane Celia Busch, 'The Throwaway Ethic in America' (PhD diss., University of Pennsylvania, 1983), 87-112.
- 2 Sears Roebuck and Company, Spring Catalog 122f (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, Spring 1911), 227; 'Advertising News and Notes,' New York Times , April 2, 1936.
- 3 1948 Chux advertisement, N. W. Ayer &amp; Son Advertising Agency Records, Series 11-Cunningham and Walsh Incorporated, Collection 59, box 64, folder Chicopee Mills, Archives Center, National Museum of American History (NMAH), Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC (emphasis added).
- 4 Sears Roebuck and Company, Fall Catalog 233H (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1966), 92.
- 5 Robert Samuelson, 'The Way We Diaper,' Newsweek 115 (March 1990): 46.
- 6 Carolyn Merchant, 'Gender and Environmental History,' Journal of American History 76 (March 1990): 1120. William Cronon, Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York: Norton, 1995); Jennifer Price, Flight Maps: Adventures with Nature in Modern America (New York: Basic, 1999); Richard Tucker, Insatiable Appetite: The United States and the Ecological Degradation of the Tropical World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000); John Soluri, Banana Cultures: Agriculture, Consumption and Environmental Change in Honduras and the United States (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2005); Bartow Elmore, Citizen Coke: The Making of Coca-Cola Capitalism (New York: Norton, 2016).
- 7 Richard White, 'Are You an Environmentalist, or Do You Work for a Living?: Work and Nature,' in Uncommon Ground , ed. William Cronon (New York: Norton, 1995), 172.
- 8 Incontinence products for older consumers are significant, but their use was not widespread during the period that this article examines, and, thus, they are not discussed in this article.
- 9 Some Kenyan families and proponents of 'elimination communication' in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand follow similar practices. Kelly Dombroski, 'Learning to Be Affected: Maternal Connection, Intuition, and 'Elimination Communication,'' Emotion, Space, and Society 26 (2018): 74-75; Marten W. DeVries and M. Rachel DeVries, 'Cultural Relativity of Toilet Training Readiness: A Perspective from East Africa,' Pediatrics 60 (August 1977): 172-74; Anita Sundnes, 'Developing a Context-Sensitive Understanding of Infant Toilet Training: Cleanliness Regimes Adjusted for Everyday Life Considerations,' International Journal of Early Childhood 50 (October 2018): 281-82.
- 10 Sears Roebuck and Company, Spring Catalog 126L (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1913), 51; Sears Roebuck and Company, Spring Catalog 152E (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1926), 139; Sears Roebuck and Company, Fall Catalog 179D (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1939), 302; Sears Roebuck and Company, Fall Catalog 233H , 92.
- 11 Sears, Roebuck, and Company, Spring Catalog 214K (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1957), 390; Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 'Top Quality Honeysuckle Diapers,' Fall Catalog 219F (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1959), 507; Sears Roebuck and Company, Fall Catalog 229H (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1964), 385.

- 12 Kendall Company Annual Report, December 30, 1961, box 2, Kendall Company Historical Archive, Sharon, MA.
- 13 Sears Roebuck and Company, Fall Catalog 233H , 93.
- 14 Sears, Roebuck, and Company, Spring Catalog 136L (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1918), 205; Sears, Roebuck, and Company, Spring Catalog 158R (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1929), 92; Sears, Roebuck, and Company, Spring Catalog 190L (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1945), 244; Martha Eliot, Infant Care (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1929), 28; Benjamin Spock, Baby and Child Care (New York: Pocket Books, 1957), 173.
- 15 Spock, Baby and Child Care , 171-73; Better Homes and Gardens Baby Book , rev. ed. (New York: Bantam Books, 1969), 136-39; and, frankly, personal experience.
- 16 Jacqueline Wolf, Don't Kill Your Baby: Public Health and the Decline of Breastfeeding in the 19th and 20th Centuries (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2001), 34.
- 17 Martha Eliot, Infant Care (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1929), 57.
- 18 Linda Nash, Inescapable Ecologies: A History of Environment, Disease, and Knowledge (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006).
- 19 T. Barry Brazelton, 'A Child-Oriented Approach to Toilet Training,' Pediatrics 29 (January 1962): 121-26; Matha Wolfenstein, 'Trends in Infant Care,' American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 23 (January 1953): 127-28.
- 20 Mollie Stevens Smart and Helen Dudley Bull, 'Living with Baby,' Cornell Bulletin for Homemakers 5, no. 715 (May 1947): 18.
- 21 Marion Faegre, Infant Care , Children's Bureau Publication no. 8 (Washington, DC: Federal Security Agency, 1951), 87.
- 22 Jessica Martucci, Back to the Breast: Natural Motherhood and Breastfeeding in America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 28-29.
- 23 Westinghouse Home Economics Institute, Home Laundering Guide for Clothes and Fabrics (Mansfield: Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company, 1944), 24.
- 24 Ruth Schwartz Cowan, More Work for Mother : The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave (New York: Basic Books, 1983), 94; Thomas Tibbetts, 'Expanding Ownership of Household Equipment,' Monthly Labor Review 87 (1964): 1131-34; United States Census Bureau, 1960 Census of Housing , vol. 1, part 1 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1963), xliii.
- 25 Nellie Perkins, A Survey of Some Fatigue Problems of Rural Homemakers (Urbana: University of Illinois, 1945), 16.
- 26 US Census Bureau, 1970 Census of Housing (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1972), 1-5.
- 27 David Katzman, Seven Days a Week: Women and Domestic Service in Industrializing America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 47, 52-53.
- 28 Elizabeth Moore, Maternal and Infant Care in a Rural County in Kansas (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1917), 31; 'Families' Decisions in the Care of Laundry,' volume I, box 25, Department of Household Economics and Management Research Studies, 1913-1971, Collection 23-18-1648, Cornell University Archives, Ithaca, NY.
- 29 Arwen Mohun, Steam Laundries: Gender, Technology, and Work in the United States and Great Britain, 1880-1940 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999), 256-58; Elizabeth Dobson, 'An Infant Industry Grows UP,' Hygeia , May 1939, 421-22; William Truppner, United States Census of Business, 1948 , vol. 6 (Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, 1952), 1-2, Table 1A: Selected

Services, United States; US Census Bureau, 1963 Census of Business , vol. 7, part 1 (Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, 1966), 1-6; US Census Bureau, 1972 Census of Selected Service Industries , vol. 1 (Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, 1976), 7; 'Great Diaper Rash: Disposable Diaper Business,' Forbes 106 (December 1970): 24.

- 30 Elizabeth Sweeney Herbert, 'Automation: Babies Demand It,' McCall's 83 (March 1956): 94-95.
- 31 'Great Diaper Rash,' 25; Thomas Heinrich and Bob Batchelor, Kotex, Kleenex, Huggies: Kimberly-Clark and the Consumer Revolution in American Business (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2004), 143-48.
- 32 'Sears Own Layettes,' in Sears Roebuck and Company, Fall Catalog 233H , 100.
- 33 Sears Roebuck and Company, 'Cloth Diapers,' Sears Catalog 249H (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1974), 345; Sears Roebuck and Company, Sears Catalog 257H (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1978), 382; Sears Roebuck and Company, 'Sears Disposable Diapers,' Sears Catalog 244K (Chicago: Sears Roebuck and Company, 1972), 399; Sears Roebuck and Company, 'Facts about Cloth Diapers,' Sears Catalog 268K (Chicago: Sears, Roebuck, and Company, 1984), 264.
- 34 National Cotton Council of America , Cotton Counts Its Customers, The Quantity of Cotton Consumed in Final Uses in the United States, 1959 (Memphis: National Cotton Council of America, 1959), 7; National Cotton Council of America, Cotton Counts Its Customers (Memphis: National Cotton Council of America, 1975), 9.
- 35 'Great Diaper Rash,' 25.
- 36 'Disposable Diapers,' Consumer Reports , February 1971, 81; Heinrich and Batchelor, Kotex, Kleenex, Huggies , 144, 186.
- 37 'Disposable Diapers,' Consumer Reports , March 1961, 151; 'Disposable Diapers,' Consumer Reports , February 1971, 81-82.
- 38 Howard Hayghe, 'Rise in Mothers' Labor Force Activity Includes Those with Infants,' Monthly Labor Review 109 (February1986): 45; Susan Strasser, Never Done: History of American Housework (New York: Pantheon, 1983), 301-3.
- 39 Kirsten Swinth, 'Post-Family Wage, Postindustrial Society: Reframing the Gender and Family Order through Working Mothers in Reagan's America,' Journal of American History 105, no. 2 (September 2018): 315-16; Dorothy Cobble, 'A 'Tiger by the Toenail': The 1970s Origins of the New Working-Class Majority,' Labor 2, no. 3 (Fall 2005): 107.
- 40 Ruth Rosen, The World Split Open: How the Modern Women's Movement Changed America (New York: Penguin, 2006), 88-89; Sarah Evans, Tidal Wave: How Women Changed America at Century's End (New York: Free Press, 2003), 24-46; Marjorie Spruill, Divided We Stand: The Battle over Women's Rights and Family Values That Polarized American Politics (New York: Bloomsbury, 2017), 17-19; Kirsten Swinth, Feminism's Forgotten Fight: The Unfinished Struggle for Work and Family (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018), 4-5.
- 41 United Press International, 'Militant Sisters March,' Syracuse Post-Standard , August 27, 1970.
- 42 Irene Sanders to Ms. Magazine , June 26, 1978, reprinted in Mary Thom, ed., Letters to Ms., 1972-1987 (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1978), 63.
- 43 Joseph Pleck, Working Wives/Working Husbands (Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1985), 80; James A. Levine, Who Will Raise the Children? New Options for Fathers (and Mothers) (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1976), 30-34, 173-75; Swinth, Feminism's Forgotten Fight , 49-62.

- 44 Kathryn Walker and Margaret Woods, Time Use: A Measure of Household Production of Family Goods and Services (Washington, DC: Center for the Family of the American Home Economics Association, 1976), 202-4.
- 45 Sharon Nickols and Karen Fox, 'Buying Time and Saving Time: Strategies for Managing Household Production,' Journal of Consumer Research 10 (September 1983): 203.
- 46 Spruill, Divided We Stand , 74-75; Robert O. Self, All in the Family: The Realignment of American Democracy since the 1960s (New York: Hill and Wang, 2012), 129-33; Swinth, Feminism's Forgotten Fight , 156-73.
- 47 Robert Schiani, 'Feasibility Study of a Diaper Service in Great Falls, Montana' (MBA thesis, University of Montana, 1977), 54; E. Belle Evans and George Saia, Day Care for Infants: The Case for Infant Day Care and a Practical Guide (Boston: Beacon Press, 1972), 7-9; Emilie Stolzfus, Citizen/Worker/Mother: Debating Public Responsibility for Child Care after the Second World War (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003), 222; Sonya Michel, Children's Interests/Mother's Rights: The Shaping of America's Child Care Policy (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000), 269-74; Karen Krett, 'Maternity, Paternity, and Child Care Policies,' Personnel Administrator 30 (June 1985): 136; Day Care DivisionAdministration for Children, Youth, and Families, Comparative Licensing Study: Profiles of Day Care Licensing Requirements, 3 vols.(Washington, DC: Lawrence Johnson and Associates, 1978), Appendix A.
- 48 Evans and Saia, Day Care for Infants , 148-50.
- 49 Al Griffin, How to Start and Operate a Day Care Home (Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, 1973), 77.
- 50 Day Care Division, Comparative Licensing Study , vol. 2, 33.
- 51 Carol Powers, 'Daycare,' Momma , December 1972, 9.
- 52 Lynet Uttal and Mary Tuominen, 'Tenuous Relationships: Exploitation, Emotion, and Racial Ethnic Significance in Child Care Work, Gender and Society 13 (December 1999): 772. I examined nursing journals and oral histories of domestic and care workers but found no evidence on paid care workers' attitudes about diapering for this period.
- 53 Pampers advertisement in Modern Hospital 112 (November 1969) 9; Frances Ginsberg, 'Emergency Rooms Court Disaster If Not Equipped with Disposables,' Modern Hospital 106 (January 1966): 128-29; Frances Ginsberg, 'Committee on Disposables Keeps Hospital Abreast of New Products,' Modern Hospital 106 (February 1966), 124; Jean Christie and Frances Ginsberg, 'Dispose of Resuables to Cut Money and People Problems,' Modern Hospital 109 (November 1968): 136; 'Use of Disposables Will Keep Growing,' Modern Hospital 115 (August 1970): 52.
- 54 William Small, 'Solid Waste: Please Burn, Chop, Compact, or Otherwise Destroy This Problem,' Modern Hospital 117 (August 1971): 101-2.
- 55 'Waste Disposal Experts Address Hospital Bureau,' Modern Hospital 116 (April 1971): 56. Although not limited to disposable diapers specifically, but one study identified the maternity department as accounting for 12 percent of hospital waste materials, trailing only the main kitchen and patients' rooms as sources of waste. Small, 'Solid Waste,' 102.
- 56 Marion O'Brien Donovan resume, April 22, 1976, box 1, Marion O'Brien Donovan Papers, 1949-1996, Archives Center, NMAH.
- 57 Gary Darby, Weyerhaeuser Company, C88-0112.14, box 953, Weyerhauser Paper Company Records, 1864-2010 (Weyerhauser Papers), Forest History Society Archives, Durham, NC.
- 58 William Boyd, The Slain Wood: Papermaking and Its Environmental Consequences in the American South (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2015), 67-109;

Timothy Minchin, The Color of Work: The Struggle for Civil Rights in the Southern Paper Industry, 1945-1980 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2001), 1213 ; Bruce Kaufman, 'The Emergence and Growth of a Nonunion Sector in the Southern Paper Industry,' in Southern Labor in Transition , ed. Robert Zeiger (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1997), 296-97.

- 59 In 1973, ITT Rayonier built the first line specifically designed to make fluff pulp in Jesup, Georgia. The same year, International Paper designed its Texarkana, Texas, plant to produce fluff pulp and expanded the plant in 1978. In 1979, the company added a new mill in Oglethorpe, Georgia, for the purpose. In 1970, Weyerhauser began building a mill on the Neuse River near New Bern, North Carolina. Weyerhaeuser also converted a milk carton machine in its Plymouth plant to make diaper stuffing. In the late 1970s, Kimberly-Clark retooled its plant near Birmingham, Alabama, to produce 350 tons per day of fluff pulp, using water from the Coosa River to dilute its effluent. Kenneth E. Smith, 'Kimberly-Clark Adds 350-TPD Fluff Pulp Capacity at Coosa Pines Mill,' Pulp and Paper 54(June 1980): 128-33; Marketing/Technology Service, North American Fluff Pulp Market, 1987-2000 , vol. 5, North American and World Fluff Pulp Supply (Kalamazoo: Marketing/Technology Service, 1987), 3-13.
- 60 Jefferson Cowie, Capital Moves: RCA's Seventy-Year Quest for Cheap Labor (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1999), 11.
- 61 Peter Schulman, From Cotton Belt to Sunbelt: Federal Policy, Economic Development, and the Transformation of the South, 1938-1980 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991), 176-77; James Cobb, The Selling of the South : The Southern Crusade for Industrial Development , 2nd ed. (Champaign: University of Illinois, 1993), 113-15.
- 62 Kendall did not produce the pulp for its diapers; hence, it had fewer concerns about wood supply or water pollution regulations. Kendall Company, 'Disposable Diaper Expansion,' August 20, 1971, 9, Kendall Company Historical Archive.
- 63 Minchin, Color of Work , 13; Kaufman, 'Emergence and Growth,' 322-23; Boyd, Slain Wood , 146-47.
- 64 By the early 1970s, the volume of chemicals applied to cotton had decreased as a greater share of cotton cultivation shifted to the Texas plains and as cotton growers adopted integrated pest management. Pierre Crosson and Sterling Brubaker, Resource and Environmental Effects of U.S. Agriculture (Baltimore: Resources for the Future, 1982), 26, 81, 89-95; D. Clayton Brown, King Cotton (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2011), 150-53.
- 65 Council on Economic Priorities, Pollution in the Pulp and Paper Industry (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1972), 7; Environmental Protection Agency Office of Compliance, Profile of the Pulp and Paper Industry (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, September 1995), 38; US Bureau of the Census, 1977 Census of Manufacturers, Water Use in Manufacturing (Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, 1981), B-5.
- 66 J. A. Hall, The Pulp and Paper Industry and the Northwest (Portland: US Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, United States Forest Service, 1969), 36; Walter Lawrance, A Twenty-Five Year Review of Androscoggin River Pollution Control Activities (Lewiston: Androscoggin River Technical Committee, 1967), 3.
- 67 Council on Economic Priorities, Pollution in the Pulp and Paper Industry , 4.
- 68 William Bryan, The Price of Permanence: Nature and Business in the New South (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2017), 103-6.
- 69 Frank Maloney, Sheldon Plager, and Fletcher Baldwin Jr., 'Water Pollution: Attempts to Decontaminate Florida Law,' Florida Law Review 20 (Fall 1967): 134;

Gloria Horning, 'Social Network and Environmental Justice: A Case Study in Perry, Florida' (PhD diss., Florida State University, 2005), 40-42. Not coincidentally, Nassau County, Florida, the other county designated in 1947 as an 'industrial' county, became home to another of the nation's largest pulp mills supplying the diaper trade: Rayonier at Fernandina Beach.

- 70 Jack Porter Oden, Development of the Southern Pulp and Paper Industry, 19001970' (PhD diss. Mississippi State University, 1973), 195-96.
- 71 'Advances Made in Stream Improvement,' Pulp and Paper 41 (May 29, 1967): 7.
- 72 Robert Livingston, Kenneth Heck Jr., Theresa Hooks, and Michael Zimmerman, The Ecological Impact of Pulp Mill Effluents on Aquatic Flora and Fauna of North Florida: Comparison of a Polluted Drainage System (Fenholloway) with an Unpolluted One (Econfina) (Tallahassee: Florida State University, 1973), 16, 19.
- 73 Ronald Jenkins, Robert Angus, Heather McNatt, W. Mike Howell, Jon Kemppainen, Marion Kirtk, and Elizabeth Wilson, 'Identification of Androstenedione in a River Containing Paper Mill Effluent,' Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 20 (June 2001): 1325-31; Janet Raloff, 'Macho Water: Some River Pollution Spawns Body-Altering Steroids,' Science News 159 (January 2001): 8-9.
- 74 Nancy Langston, Toxic Bodies: Hormone Disruptors and the Legacy of DES (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010); Jody Roberts and Nancy Langston, 'Toxic Bodies/Toxic Environments: An Interdisciplinary Forum,' Environmental History 13 (October 2008): 629-703.
- 75 Clean Water Act, October 18, 1972, 86 Stat. 816.
- 76 Meeds to Mr. Lawrence E. Birke Jr., December 10, 1975, Folder D-EPA Pulp Mills, box 52, Lloyd Meeds Papers, Accession 2900-9, University of Washington Archives, Seattle, WA.
- 77 Marketing/Technology Service, North American Fluff Pulp Market , 3-13.
- 78 Washington State Enforcement Project, Pollutional Effects of Pulp and Paper Mill Wastes in Puget Sound, Washington (Portland and Olympia: Federal Water Pollution Control Administration, Northwest Regional Office and Washington State Pollution Control Commission, Department of Interior, 1967), 83, 91, 205.
- 79 'Weyerhaeuser Opts to Phase Out Pulp Mill,' Wall Street Journal , January 12, 1972; 'Pulp Mill Will Close over Pollution Curbs,' Los Angeles Times , January 12, 1972. Weyerhaeuser had two mills in Everett-the company sought to close its sulfite mill in the early 1970s but left its kraft mill open through 1992.
- 80 'Our Second Year in the 1970s,' Weyerhaeuser World , February 1971, 8.
- 81 W. H. Meadowcroft, 'Notes on North Carolina Visit, 1977,' Series II: Directors and Executives, 1900-2002, box 389, Weyerhaeuser Papers; Merril Robinson Interview transcript, box 466, Weyerhaeuser Papers.
- 82 Work in America: Implications for Families: Hearing before the Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families , Ninety-ninth Congress, Second Session, April 17, 1986 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1986), 2.