<!-- image -->

## Social History

ISSN: 0307-1022 (Print) 1470-1200 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rshi20

## Gender antagonism and class conflict: Exclusionary strategies of male trade unionists in nineteenthcentury Britain

## Sonya O. Rose

To cite this article: Sonya O. Rose (1988) Gender antagonism and class conflict: Exclusionary strategies of male trade unionists in nineteenthcentury Britain , Social History, 13:2, 191-208, DOI: 10.1080/03071028808567710

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/03071028808567710

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 30 May 2008.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 3275

View related articles

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

<!-- image -->

## Sonya O. Rose

## Gender  antagonism  and  class conflict : exclusionary  strategies of male trade  unionists  in  nineteenthcentury  Britain*

In response to a letter condemning women's competition with men for jobs in England, a woman wrote to the Women's  Trade  Union  Journal in  1879, 'Rivals of Men! Why should they be rivals? Why not co-workers?' Her question is as germane now, in our attempt to understand  the  ways  in  which  gender  relations  and  gender  ideology  interacted  with industrial capitalism, as it was in those early years of the women's union movement. Why was it  that  working  men,  especially  skilled  workers,  advocated  an  exclusionist  strategy rather  than  joining with  women  as workers  against  capital?

There  are several  differing  accounts  in the historiographie  and  sociological  literature of  why  male  unionists  adopted  such  a  strategy  rather  than  choosing  to  combine  with women to fight employers. Perhaps the best-known discussions of this issue are those by Heidi Hartmann  and Jane Humphries.  Hartmann has suggested that the explanation is 1 2 to be sought  in the  patriarchal  relations between  men  and women.  Such  relations were, established prior to the development of capitalism. Capitalist labour practices threatened to  destroy  the  family  and  men's  power  over  women's  labour.  Organized  male  workers rejected  women  as co-workers in order  to maintain  dominance  in  the workplace  and  to command  their  wives'  domestic  services  in  the  home.  They  were  able  to  do  this  in relation  to  women  workers  because  of  their  superior  organizational  skills,  learned  in patriarchal households in which men controlled the labour of other household members.   In  Hartmann's  analysis,  men  benefited  from  women's  removal  from  the 3 workplace  by  assuring  that  unwaged  women  provided  for  them  in  their  homes.  She argues then that  men  are the beneficiaries  of job segregation  by sex both  as men and  as toorkers, and  are  partially  responsible  for  its  creation.

- *  I would  like to thank Hal Benenson for  his very helpful  comments on an earlier version of this  paper.
- 1 H. Hartmann, 'Capitalism, patriarchy, and job segregation by sex' in M. Blaxall and B.  Reagan  (eds), Women  and  the  Workplace (Chicago,  Ill.,  1976),  137-70.
- 2 J. Humphries, 'Class struggle and the

persistence of the working-class family', Cambridge Journal  of Economics, 1 (1977).

- 3 For an extension of this argument see A.  Witz,  'Patriarchy  and  the  labour market: occupational  control  strategies and  the  medical division of labour' in D. Knights and H.  Willmott, Gender  and  the  Labour  Process (1986).

While  agreeing  with  Hartmann  that  male  workers  have  played  a significant  role  in excluding  women  from  some  sections  of  the  labour  force,  Humphries  suggests  that unionists  did  not  act  selfishly by  arguing  for legislative restrictions on  women's employment. Male workers did not gain monetarily as individuals from these restrictions, as men were already earning higher wages and working shorter hours. It was women who were the indirect  beneficiaries  of  protective  legislation  'through  increased family wages'  earned  by  their  husbands  or  fathers. 4 Further, she  argues  that  the working-class family was strengthened  and defended  by working-class men and women as a buffer  against  the encroachment  of capitalism  in everyday  life.  The  working-class family promoted mutual dependence rather than individualism and  provided the potential  for  class  cohesion.

In  opposition  to  Hartmann,  Humphries'  thesis  suggests  that  it  was not  patriarchal motives  that  led  men  to  exclude  women  from  their  jobs.  Rather,  exclusion  produced material benefits for all family members and contributed to the working-class struggle for a  higher  standard  of  living  under  capitalist  relations  of  production.  For  Hartmann, patriarchal  relations  between  men  and  women  explained  why  male  workers  chose  to exclude  women  workers  rather  than  organize  them.  For  Humphries,  it  was the  class struggle  that  explained  why working  men chose to limit women's work in  industry.

In a provocative article which discusses the variations in different  working-class men's responses to women's employment  in America,  Ruth  Milkman  agrees with  Humphries that  the  relationship  between  working  men's  interests  and  the working-class  family  is ambiguous and more complex than  Hartmann's thesis would suggest.   Milkman  argues 5 that it is important to examine how ideology shapes men's interests. In Milkman's words, 'That broader ideology is the terrain on which the interests of "men as men" are formed, under  certain  conditions  while  a  very  different ideology,  and  a  different set  of conditions  would  cause  the  shared  class  interests  of  men  and  women  to  prevail.' 6 Milkman  argues  that  the  ideology  of  domesticity  was  broadly  accepted  and  shaped working-class  opposition  to the use of women's  labour  in factories  in  mid-nineteenthcentury America. Working men's opposition to women's employment 'emerged from the struggle for a "family  wage", on the one hand,  and for the protection of traditional  craft skills, on the other, against the tendencies within capitalist development to erode both'. 7 When successful  opposition to the introduction of women into industry began to falter in the late nineteenth  century,  responses by working men depended on whether they were affiliated with  craft  unions  or  with  an  organization  which  dispensed  with  skill  as a criterion  for membership  promoting the unity  between  skilled  and unskilled  workers. 8

Milkman aids understanding of men's  exclusionary strategies by suggesting that  it is

- 4 For a critique of this argument see M.  Barrett  and  M.  Macintosh,  'The  family wage: some problems for socialists and feminists', Capital  and Class, XI  (1980), 111-33. See  also  J.  Humphries,  'Protective legislation,  the  capitalist state  and  workingclass men', Feminist  Review, VII  (1981), 239-63 and the letter by Angela John, Feminist Review, IX (1981), 106-9.
- 5 R. Milkman, 'Organizing the sexual division
- of  labor:  historical  perspectives  on  "women's work"  and  the  American  labor movement', Socialist  Review (Jan.-Feb. 1980), 105-8.
- 7 ibid., 110.
- 6 ibid., 107.
- 8 ibid., 110-14. See also S. Levine, 'Labor's true  woman:  domesticity  and  equal rights in the  knights  of  labor', Journal  of American History, LXX (1983), 232-339.

necessary  to  go  beyond  an  argument  based  on  an  unchanging  patriarchy  in  order  to explain why some men were exclusionary and others were not.  By showing that  Unionists with  differing  labour  ideologies  differed  also  in  their  responses  to  women  workers  she cautions against  easy generalizations.  Milkman's argument  that  the opposition  to women's labour  in  the  early  years  of  industrial  capitalism  arose  out  of  the  responses  of  skilled workers to  the  threat  that  capitalist  development  posed  to  their  craft  traditions  and  to their wages is especially suggestive. However, she implies that the middle-class ideology of domesticity was uniformly  shared by the working class and it shaped the direction of men's responses in mid-nineteenth-century  America. Although  Milkman notes that  this ideology contrasted markedly with the colonial period, when women were expected to make economic  contributions  to their  households  and  idleness was thought  to  be  sinful,  she does not  discuss how the acceptance  of the  ideology  of domesticity  became  widespread and  was taken  up  by members  of the working class. It  is unclear  in Milkman's  account whether the middle-class view of women's place was adopted opportunistically as part of the  rhetoric  employed  by organized  men  to defend  their  position; whether  they  simply accepted  this  definition  uncritically  and  applied  it  to  their  own  lives;  or  whether  the working-class members' acceptance of the ideology of domesticity  emerged  out  of  their own experiences as men  and  women  in the  decades prior to  mid-century.

The discussion of the use of exclusionary strategies by one group of workers to restrict the employment of another group of workers has also been a focus of American  scholars interested in explaining ethnic antagonism. Edna  Bonacich  has  argued that such antagonism  or  intergroup  conflict  is  generated  in  a  labour  market  split  along  ethnic lines.   She suggests a split labour market contains at least two groups of workers whose 9 price of labour differs  for the same work, or would differ  if they did the same work.  The group  which  earns  higher  wages  is  threatened  by  the  introduction  of  cheaper  labour because  it  fears  loss of  employment  or  a reduction  of  wages to  those of  the  lower-paid group.  Bonacich  contends  that  the  price  of  labour  is  not  a  consequence  of  prejudice. Rather,  it  is due  to  the  'resources  and  motives' of  the  lower-paid  workers.  For  reasons that are correlated with ethnicity, some workers will accept a lower wage. Employers use this group  of workers to undercut  higher-priced  workers, thus generating a split  labour market.  Although  Bonacich's  theory  is  developed  to  explain  ethnic  antagonism,  she suggests that  it is applicable to gender antagonism as well. She notes that the  responses of  white  male  unionists  to  the  threat  of  cheap  labour  posed  by  American  blacks  and women  are  similar. 10 Bonacich  argues  that  women's  labour  has  been  cheap  because 'women often  labor for  supplementary  incomes'. 11

Much of the research on women's work in both America and Britain since Bonacich's article appeared  has undermined  the assumption that women worked for  supplementary wages.  Instead, feminist scholarship  has  shown  that  women  were  construed  to  be supplementary wage earners regardless of whether their wages actually were supplementing the earnings of their husbands or fathers, whether they were self-supporting,  or whether they were heads of households bearing the major responsibility for subsistence. Thus her theory  does  not  suggest,  in  a  manner  that  is generalizable  to  gender  antagonism,  why

- 9 E. Bonacich, 'A theory of ethnic antagonism: the split  labor market', American Sociological Review, xxxvii  (1972), 547-59.

1 0 ibid., 558.

- 11 ibid., 552.

particular  groups  of workers enter  the  labour  market  as low-waged  workers  in the  first place.  In  addition,  her  theory  of  ethnic  antagonism  does not  explain why restriction  or exclusion  is the  outcome  of  competition  with  a group  of  low-waged  workers  for  jobs. However,  Bonacich's work is important  because it stresses the importance  of  economic competition  among  workers  and  the  potential  threat  posed  by  a  group  of  low-waged workers  in explaining  inter-group  conflict. 12

Jonathan  Turner  has proposed  a general  model  of  ethnic  antagonism  which  extends the Bonacich theory in a manner which makes it more suitable for an analysis of gender antagonism  and  the  conditions  under  which  it  results  in  exclusion. 13 Working  with  a complex set of  interacting variables,  the  Turner  model  suggests that  as labour  markets become competitive,  some subgroups  may feel  threatened  by others who are willing to work  for  lower  wages  and  thus  will  attempt  to  exclude  them  (in  Turner's  terms, exclusion  is an act of  discrimination).  Turner  argues that  discrimination  requires  some motivating  force  which  he  identifies  as  'people's  perceptions  that  their  interests  (e.g. economic, political, lifestyle)  are threatened  by another identifiable  subpopulation'. 14 In addition,  discrimination  must  be  seen  to  be  legitimate;  thus  beliefs  about  the  lowerwaged  workers  are  crucial. In Turner's model,  discrimination is the product  of perceptions of threat  and  processes of  cultural  legitimation.  Although  Turner  does  not specify  the  conditions  under  which  one  subgroup  would  be  willing  to  work  for  lower wages than another subgroup  (other than the existence of a competitive market system), he suggests that the sub-population  must be identifiable and recognizes that  discrimination and stigmatizing beliefs reinforce  the identifiability  of a particular ethnic population.  In addition, Turner proposes that identifiability  is sustained and enhanced  by the extent of intra-group  interaction  and  the  intensity  of  stigmatizing  beliefs. ls As  in  Milkman's thesis, Turner proposes that broader ideological currents can mediate the likelihood  that conflict  will lead  to outright  discrimination.  He suggests that  in societies with  strongly developed  egalitarian  values, unless  Darticularlv  negative stigmatizing  beliefs  about  the

12 Since Bonacich's discussion of split  labour markets,  there  have  been  major  developments in theories of labour market segmentation. Such theories are important in helping to explain the persistence of occupational  segregation by sex and, in some  versions, to an understanding  of  how organized  male  workers contribute  to  segmentation.  See,  for  example, J.  Rubery,  'Structured  labour  markets,  worker organization  and low pay' in A. Amsden  (ed.), The Economics of Women and  Work (Harmondsworth,  1980)  and  E.  Garnsey,  J.  Rubery  and F. Wilkinson,  'Labour  market  structure  and workforce divisions' in R. Deem and G.  Salaman, Work, Culture and  Society (Milton Keynes,  1985).  However,  as numerous  critics have  pointed  out,  dual  or  segmented labour market  theories  generally  have  not  concerned themselves with why women have been relegated to a particular segment,  and have either  adopted a human capital approach to understanding  the relationship  between  labour  supply  and  labour

demand, or have simply assumed that the forces  of  the  market  are  sufficient to  explain women's  secondary  labour  market  status.  See V. Beechey, 'Women and production: a critical analysis of some sociological theories of  women's work' in A. Kuhn and A. Wolpe (eds), Feminism and Materialism (1978); A.  MacEwen Scott, 'Industrialization, gender segregation and  stratification  theory'  in  R.  Crompton  and M.  Mann, Gender  and Stratification (Cambridge,  1986);  and  R.J.  Thomas,  'Citizenship and  gender  in  work  organization:  some  considerations  for  theories of  the  labor  process' in M.  Burawoy  and  T.  Skocpol  (eds), Marxist Inquiries:  Studies of Labor,  Class  and States, supplement  to American  Journal of  Sociology, Lxxxviii  (1982),  86-112.

13 J.H.  Turner,  'Toward  a unified  theory of ethnic  antagonism', Sociological  Forum, 1,  3 (1986),  403-27.

14 ibid., 417.

15 ibid., 423-4.

competing  group  of  workers  are  prevalent,  discrimination  may  not  be  the  outcome  of antagonism.

Although  the  Turner  model  is  too  abstract  to  be  helpful in  understanding the dynamics of exclusion in particular historical instances, it suggests that certain classes of variables  be  considered  in  such  an  analysis.  In  particular,  the  model  suggests  that exclusionary  strategies  are  the  consequence  of  competition,  threat,  ideology  (legitimating beliefs  in  Turner's  model),  and  the  identifiability or  distinctiveness  of  a  particular subgroup  of  workers.

Recent  research  has  revealed  the  conflicts  that  occurred  over  the  employment  of women  in  nineteenth-century British industries.  These  conflicts resulted from the struggle  between  skilled  male workers and  capitalists  as employers  attempted  to  lower labour costs by drawing on a low-waged pool of labour. 16 Opposing class interests under capitalist relations of production provided fertile soil for the development  of antagonism between different  groups of workers. In this paper I will suggest that gender antagonism and  exclusionary  strategies  resulted  because  of  a  complex  interaction  between  gender issues and class issues. Women comprised  an easily identifiable  and distinctive group of workers. They had already been identified as cheap labour prior to industrial transformation.  When  it was possible  to do so,  employers attempted  to  hire  women  in place of men, or they created new technology and designed it to be worked by women. 17 The  competition  between  men  and  women  for  jobs  resulted  in  gender  antagonism. Organized  with  the explicit  goal of  protecting  the  prerogatives  of  their  status  as skilled workers,  male  unionists  employed  exclusionary  strategies  because  of  the particular threat that women posed to skilled working men. Loss of their livelihood to women may have threatened skilled male workers' ability to live up to the expectations of themselves as men.  Their  position  as the  primary  or  sole source  of  family  income was  potentially undermined;  their  sense of  masculine  identity  was being challenged.  It  was this  threat that  provided  what  Turner  would  classify  as the  'motivating  force'  for  exclusion.  This suggests that there were connections between the status of the skilled worker at work and his role in the family which may be important in understanding gender antagonism  and exclusionary  practices. 18

16 The  issue  of  why  employers  in  particular industries  attempted  to  introduce  women,  while employers in other industries continued to rely solely  upon male  labour is important to an understanding of occupational segregation. However, it will not be addressed in this paper. Rather,  the  paper  will  be  concerned  with  the question of why  male  unionists  resisted the employment  of  women  by  using  exclusionary strategies  in  those  industries  in which  employers attempted  to  introduce  female  labour  on  jobs formerly  held  exclusively  by  men.

17 The  issue  of  skill  and  the  training  that  it required is a  complex  issue  which will not specifically  be  addressed  in  this  paper.  For  a discussion of the 'social construction of skill' see A. Phillips and B. Taylor,  'Sex and skill: notes

towards a feminist  economics', Feminist  Review, VI  (1982). See also a recent article which criticizes  the  'social  construction'  of  skill  argument:  M.  Freifeld,  'Technical  change  and  the self-acting  mule', Social  History, XI,  3  (1986), 319-43.

18 S.O.Rose,  'Gender at work: sex, class and industrial capitalism', History Workshop, xxi (Spring  1986),  113-31.  See also S.  Alexander, 'Women,  class  and  sexual  difference', History Workshop, xvii  (Spring  1984),  125-49.  For  an insightful  discussion  of  the  male  breadwinner norm and its connection to wages see W. Seccombe, 'Patriarchy stabilized: the construction of the male  breadwinner wage norm in nineteenth-century Britain', Social History, xi  (Spring  1986),  53-76.

## WOMEN AS LOW-WAGED  WORKERS

Research  on women's work in England  in the nineteenth  century has demonstrated  the variations  in  the  kinds  of  jobs  in  which  women  were  employed  and  in  the  conditions under which they earned wages. 19 The one common  characteristic of women's employment was its price. They were paid 'a .woman's wage' which generally was at most 50 to 60 per cent of the man's rate at the same work.  In the hosiery industry in i860,  for example,  men  who  operated  steam-driven  circular  machines  earned  between  20s  and 35s.  In contrast, women working the same machines earned  12-20s. 20 It is not clear that there were sharp differences  in productivity  to account  for this. Later in the century,  in 1891,  it was reported to Sidney Webb, for instance, that women soldered the fine pieces of  wire  together  to  make  loops  in  the  production of 'self-opening' pins  for wages averaging  7-ios  weekly,  replacing  men  who  had  earned  from  15s to  20s weekly  doing exactly  the  same  work. 21 While  it  might  be  argued  that  women  were  paid  low  wages because they worked  at low-waged jobs, it could  be argued just  as forcefully  from  such evidence that  women  were paid  low wages because they were women.

The  work  of  Alice  Clark, 22 Ivy  Pinchbeck 23 and,  more  recently,  Maxine- Berg, 24 indicated  that  women  had  already  been  designated  as a low-waged  labour  force  before industrial  transformation.  Estimates of wages for women and men in medieval  England indicate  that  wages  for  work  normally  done  by  women  were  significantly  below  those paid  for  work  normally  done  by  men. 25 Among  wage  labourers  in  early,  large-scale capitalist  agriculture,  the  pay  for  women  and  girls  was  lower  than  the  pay  for  male workers. 26 Even women who did skilled work were ill-paid. For example, the rate of pay for  female flower painters in Wedgwood's  London workrooms in the early 1770s was 60 per cent of the rate for male flower painters. 27 Pinchbeck reported that in the period just prior  to the mechanization  of cotton  spinning,  manufacturers  based spinners' wages on the  assumption  that  spinners were being supported  by their  husbands. 28

While  low  wage  rates  for  women  may  have  originated  because  of  the  perception  of them as supplementary wage earners, this is undoubtedly only one among a complex set of  factors  which  led  to  the  price  of  their  labour.  Among them  is probably  the fact  that

- 19  See S.O. Rose, op. cit., 114-15; S.  Alexander,  'Women's  work  in  nineteenthcentury  London'  in J.  Mitchell  and  A.  Oakley (eds), The  Rights and Wrongs  of  Women (Harmondsworth, 1976); N.G. Osterud, 'Gender  divisions and the organization of work in  the  Leicester  hosiery  industry'  in  A.  John (ed.), Unequal Opportunities:  Women's Employment  in  England  1800-1918 (Oxford,  1986); A. John, By  the Sweat  of their Brow (1980); I. Pinchbeck, Women Workers and  the  Industrial Revolution (3rd  edn,  1981).
- 20 W.  Felkin, History of the Machine-Wrought Hosiery and Lace Manufacturies (Newton Abbot,  repr.  1967).
- 21 S.  Webb, Trade Union  Papers, Sect.  A, XLVII,  37. At  the  British Library  of  Political

and  Economic  Science.

- 22 A.L. Clark, Working  Life  of Women  in the Seventeenth Century (1982).
- 23 Pinchbeck, op.  cit.
- 24 M. Berg, The  Age of Manufactures 1700-1820 (1985).
- 25 C.  Middleton,  'The  Familiar  Fate  of  the "Famulae":  Gender  as  a  Principle  of Stratification in the Historical Organization of Labour'  (unpublished  paper,  1985).
- 26 C. Middleton, 'Women's  work  and the transition to pre-industrial capitalism' in L.  Charles and L.  Duffin, Women and  Work in Pre-industrial  England (1986).
- 27 Berg, op. cit., 152.
- 28 Pinchbeck, op. cit., 144.

women had been excluded from most apprenticeships since the sixteenth century. 29 For example,  Sue Wright  has determined  that  in  Salisbury  by  the  latter  part  of  the  Tudor period,  very  few  women  were  involved  in  guilds. 30 Maxine  Berg has reported  that  the workshop  trades, which faced increasing competition from the sixteenth century onwards, excluded women from apprenticeships. 31 She has suggested that the growth of domestic industry, which made use of the labour of daughters, probably prevented  many of  them  being sent  out  to be apprenticed.  It  is also possible,  as B.L.  Hutchins  argued, that  women  and  girls  were  employed  within  their  households  as  casual  labourers;  by being available to work only when extra hands were needed,  they substituted  for  formal apprentices  and  journeymen  who would  require  regular  employment. 32

The  consequences  of  not  being  apprenticed  are  clear.  Women  were  only  able  to assume unskilled jobs, or to work casually at more skilled positions, filling in when  there was great demand. It is beyond the scope of this paper to consider in greater detail why it was  that  women  and  girls  were  excluded  from  apprenticeships  prior  to  the  factory system. The important  point is that women were already designated  as cheap,  unskilled workers  prior  to  industrial  transformation.

Industrialists  evidently  paid  women  a customary  wage rate based on  their gender.  A study of women's work and wages in Birmingham  in  io.o6.reported  that 'employers can usually give no other reasons for the actual wage than the fact that such and such a figure is what women usually get in Birmingham'. 33 If  pushed,  they might have justified  these wages as did  one  of  the  sub-commissioners  on  the  1834  Factory  Inquiry  Commission who said:

The  low  price  of  female  labor  made  it  the  most  profitable  as  well  as  the  most agreeable occupation  for  a female  to superintend  her  own  domestic  establishment, and her low wages do not tempt her to abandon the care of her own children.  Nature therefore  provided  that  her  design  shall  not  be  disappointed. 34

Lady Dilke, a strong proponent  of women's unions in the last quarter  of the  nineteenth century, argued that it is the 'natural division of labour' that influences wages, 'for man is properly regarded and paid as the breadwinner who is answerable for the maintenance of others besides himself, whilst the woman's labour, however constant and fruitful,  is only looked  on  as something  by  which  she  may supplement  his earnings'. 35 She went  on  to assert  that  women  are not  in a position  at  present  to demand  equal  payment  nor  would they be supported by public opinion because women  were  not, 'as a rule the breadwinners;  nor  as  a  rule  can  they  work  as  hard  or  as  long  as  men'.  Thus  it  was custom, supported  by the emerging ideology of domesticity for women, which  dictated women's wages and set the stage for their use by capitalists in their struggle with  labour.

A study  conducted  by  Sidney  Webb  in  1891  of  the  differences  between  men's  and

- 29 B.L. Hutchins, Women in Industry (1906, repr. New  York, 1979); Clark, op. cit.; Hartmann, op. cit.; S.  Wright,  "'Churmaids, Huswyfes  and Hucksters": the employment of women  in  Tudor and  Stuart Salisbury'  in Charles and Duffin, op.  cit.; Berg, op.  cit., 155.
- 30 Wright, op. cit., 116.
- 31 Berg, op. cit., 155.
- 32 Hutchins, op. cit.
- 34 Pinchbeck, op. cit., 194.
- 33 E. Cadbury and M.C. Matheson, Women's Work and Wages (1908), 133.
- 35 Lady  Dilke,  'Benefit societies  and  trade unions for women' in Tracts Relating to Marriage, Women, Etc. At the British  Museum, repr.  from Fortnightly Review (June  1889).

women's  wage  rates  in  a  range  of  industries  revealed  that  usually  men  and  women worked  at  different  jobs,  with  women  working  at  the  lower-paid  job. 36 If  they  did  the same  work,  women  earned  a  lower  wage.  Clementina  Black  reported  to  Webb,  for example,  that  she  observed  very  few  instances  of  identical  work  for  men  and  women. 'Where  they  exist  there  are  generally  speaking  two  scales,  one  lower  for  the  women, another  the  men's  scale.  Gradually  the  men  either  diminish  in  numbers  or  their  scale comes  down  to  meet  the  women's.' 37 This  observation  was  as  accurate  a  portrayal  of women's low pay and its consequences for men at the end of the nineteenth century as it was in the  earlier  years of  the  industrial  period.

## GENDER  ANTAGONISM

When cotton spinning in England  was mechanized,  some sections of it became a man's trade.  As  early  as  1818  male  cotton  spinners  were  threatened  by  masters'  attempts  to introduce women spinners causing several instances of mill-burning. 38 This is a complex story.  In  1829 the cotton spinners decreed  that only male spinners and piecers would  be admitted to their union, and that female spinners should form their own union. 39 In  the 1830s the male spinners were particularly preoccupied by the concern that the advance of machinery would mean their eventual replacement by women workers. 40 Manufacturers, in  altering  spinning  machinery,  especially  in  the  introduction  of  the  self-acting  mule, probably  intended  and  hoped  to  use  women. 41 In  Scotland,  the  transition  to  the  selfactor brought with it the general use of women and lads as operatives after  a bitter strike was broken. 42 As  a  downward  pressure  on  production  costs  continued,  working  men found their jobs  increasingly  threatened as  employers  attempted to  substitute the cheaper  labour  of women  for  men.

Economic competition  between  men and  women was, therefore,  a significant  feature of industrial transformation.  In the  1820s and  1830s there were strikes by male tailors in London  in  opposition  to  the  introduction  of  women  into  the  trade. 43 In  the  hosiery industry  in  Nottingham  and  Leicester  there  were  repeated  strikes  by  male  operatives over attempts by employers to substitute female labour, beginning in the early 1860s and lasting into the  1880s when employers introduced  a new women's machine which  could compete  successfully  with  the  men's  machine. 44 In  1872  employers  in  the  Derby  silk industry,  in an attempt  to break the newly formed  men's union,  introduced  women  into the trade. A strike lasting twenty weeks ended with the defeat of the men and the end of

- 36 Webb, op. cit., Sect. A,  LX.
- 38 N. Smelser, Social Change in the  Industrial Revolution (Chicago,  1959), 232.
- 37 ibid., 40.
- 35 B. Drake, Women  in Trade Unions (1984),  4.
- 41 W. Lazonick, 'Industrial relations  and technical  change:  the  case  of  the  self-acting mule', Cambridge Journal  of Economics, cxi (1979), 231-62.  Recently,  Lazonick's  thesis that  unionists  were able to retain  their  skilled
- 40 Smelser, op. cit., 236.

status artificially,  by retaining their positions as employers and supervisors of piecers, has been challenged by Freifeld, op. cit., 319-43.

- 42 Lazonick, op. cit., 244.
- 43 B. Taylor, Eve  and  the New  Jerusalem: Socialism  and  Feminism in the Nineteenth Century (New York,  1983), 107.
- 44 S.  Rose,  'Gender  segregation  in the transition to the factory: the English hosiery industry, 1850-1910', Feminist Studies, in press.

their local union. The extensive introduction of female labour resulted in the majority of the  male  silk  throwsters  seeking  work  as  general  labourers. 45 In  the  carpet  weaving industry  in  Elderslie,  Scotland,  new light and fast  looms were introduced  in the  1870s. The  men  struck,  objecting  to  the  quicker  speed  of  the  looms  and  the  lower  rates  they were earning. Women were hired and eventually the strike was broken. After  that time, women predominated  as carpet  weavers in  Elderslie. 46

Although a good many of these disputes were in the textile trades, gender conflict  was not  limited  to  these  industries.  Employers  in  some  quintessentially  all-male  trades attempted to hire women to do the jobs that men had been doing. As Cynthia  Cockburn has  determined,  the  'woman  question'  in  printing  created  open  and  bitter conflict between  men  and  women  compositors  in  both  London  and  Edinburgh. 47 At  least  one Birmingham metalworking firm attempted to introduce women to do work that had been done  by  men. In that case, during  the period 1879-81,  the  firm  of Smith, and Chamberlain  attempted  to  introduce  women  into  their  brassworks  to  do  what  was traditionally  thought  to  be  men's  work. 48 There  was  strong  opposition  from  the  male workers, and workers from all of the brassworks in Birmingham struck. In a letter to the Daily Post, the union argued that the men 'did not ask the firm to discharge women who were employed in legitimate occupations. We oppose, and many employers also oppose, the employment  of women  to turn  at the  lathe  and file at  the vice. 149

The  men  were  not  always  the  losers  in  these  disputes.  For  example,  a strike  in  the carpet  trade  in  Kidderminster  in  1874 ended  with  victory  for  the  men.  It  is  described here in some detail because it illustrates the intricacies of some of these conflicts and  the zeal  with  which  well-organized  male  unionists  would  fend  off  the  threat  of female workers. Brinton and  Company decided to add tapestries to its products and  purchased the 'best form of loom for women that could be found'. 50 When they put women to work on the new looms, the male weavers who worked the 'Brussels loom' went on strike and were supported  by  all  of  the  male  carpet  weavers  in  Kidderminster.  The  strike  lasted only one week and resulted in victory for the union; the women lost their jobs and carpet weaving in Kidderminster  remained  men's  work.

What  is  interesting  about  this  dispute  is  that  the  employer  was  not  attempting  to replace men with women, but merely to add women to his weaving workforce to make a new type of carpet. Why, then, were the men so resistant, especially when it was pointed out by Brinton and in newspaper editorials that women were employed on tapestry looms in  Rochdale  and  Halifax?  The  unionists  discovered  that  Brinton  had  not  introduced exactly the same looms that were being worked by women in Rochdale and Halifax,  but had  purchased  looms  which  elsewhere  were  known  as 'men's  machines'.  There  was  a difference  between the 'women's tapestry looms' and 'men's tapestry looms'. If the same kind  of  material  was used  in  both  types of  looms,  the  man's  loom  turned  out  a greater number of yards per hour than a woman's loom. This meant that in the other  places in England  where  women  and  men  both  made  the  tapestry  carpets,  but  on different machines, the cost of women's labour to the manufacturer was lower, but men were more

- 45 Webb, op. cit., Sect.  A, xxxiv,  105-6.
- 47
- 46 ibid., Sect. A, XL,  49.
- C. Cockburn, Brothers: Male  Dominance and  Technological Change (1983),  151-9.
- 48 Webb, op. cit., Sect.  A, xix, 56.
- 49 ibid., 32.
- 50 Kidderminster Shuttle, 24 October 1874, 5.

productive. Brinton, however, wished to pay women a 'woman's wage' to work the more productive 'man's  machine' in  Kidderminster.

In the negotiations, the union argued that they would not object to the employment of women if Brinton would pay men's wages to the women. However, Brinton replied that in order to be competitive with the other firms making tapestries, he had to pay women a woman's wage because 'there were many minor things about a loom which men could do but which could not possibly be done by women'. 51 Thus he said he would have to hire some men to work with the women. The union replied that 'If the looms are supposedly within  the  compass  of  a  woman,  let  her  do  it  and  be  paid  like  a  man.'  One  of  the employers  who  joined  the  negotiating  team  urged  the  union  men  to  'discuss  among themselves whether it was not a fact  that male labour must accompany female  labour'. 52 The  union  reply  to  this  challenge  dealt  with  what  they  called  the  oversupply  of  male workers  and  reflected  their  real  concern.  The  union  representative  said,  'Why should female  labour be made scarce and men's labour be left  idle?'

The  rhetoric  used  by  various  observers  and  participants  in  the  dispute  is  also instructive. The firm argued  that  competition  forced  them to look for a machine which could be worked by women and so they found  one which 'was perfectly easy and light to manage, and came within the compass of their power'. 53 The trade paper, the Furniture Gazette, supporting  the  employer,  urged  the  men  to  admit  women  to  their  union stating:

We can of course  sympathize  with  the men  .  .  . but  are not  the women  who are seeking  work,  the  fatherless  girls  and widows  with  children,  and  the  poor  young girls whose parents, from being ill-paid or out of work are unable to support  them, also deserving  of our sympathy? 54

The Birmingham Daily-Mail editorialized,  using the language of laissez-faire principles of  political  economy:

It  may be accepted as an axiom that an employer has a right to get his work done as cheaply as he can, just as a workman has an equal right to get as much wages as he can.  If  women  will  work  for  less  than  men,  the  manufacturer is  justified in employing them.  . . .  If  cheap  labour  means cheap goods, the benefit  is shared by the public and no principle is sounder than that which says the injury of a class is of less concern  than  the benefit  of the  community. 55

For the workers' parts, they were clearly on opposite sides of the issue. A letter to the local newspaper by 'a Lady Weaver' makes it clear that the women were going to fight to get jobs:

I  have the right to sell my labour at any price I like, and when and where I like; and the liberty I claim for myself  I would gladly give for others. Then why should those very big men have their crowded meetings and throw off such big words from  such little stomachs?.  . . It is quite evident that the powerloom weavers have no concern

51 ibid., 31 October  1874, 7.

52 ibid., 31 October  1874, 7.

53 ibid., 10 October  1874, 6.

54 ibid.

- 55 ibid., 17 October  1874, 5.

for  any but self,  or they would not bloc up the streets and the Marketplace  puffing their  dirty  short  pipes whilst women  and  girls have to do the  hardest  and  heaviest work  in  the  trade  such  as rug  weaving,  which  requires  both  bone  and  muscle  to perform  it. 56

The workmen apparently feared  that the introduction  of women on 'men's machines' but  at  women's  wages spelled  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  their  employment  at  carpet weaving in Kidderminster.  One of the unionists said at a strike meeting, 'It was a crying evil to see women getting into the trade. The weavers were not situated  like some other men, for they had no other occupation to turn to. They were bound to the loom without any  alternative.' 57 There  were  also reports  by  working  men  of  conditions  in  the  other carpet-making  areas where women  had  been  introduced  to make tapestries  that  fuelled their  fears:  men  had  been  discharged  from  men's  looms to  make room  for  the  women workers. The  fears  of the  men  concerning  the  possibility  of  unemployment  or  lowered wages  as  a  consequence  of  the  introduction  of  women  into  the  trade  resulted  in  the following letter to the Kidderminster Shuttle, apparently to threaten the father  of one of the loom-working  women:

mr heverley i dare say you thinks you are doing something Grand by sendding your daughters  to  rob  we  men  and  our  wifes  and  children  of  our  dailey  Bread  But  be carfull  of  What  you  are doing Because you and them will very liks get your  Brains nock out  so dont  for  get  for  we  shant. S8

The details of this strike illustrate the actions of employers attempting to lower labour costs in order to compete  successfully by undercutting their competitors. They introduced  women  and  new machines to do the work formerly  done by skilled men.  In response to the threat posed by women's lower wages, men engaged  in industrial  action to prevent the employment of women, excluded them from their unions and, when it was impossible  to  restrict  altogether  their  entry  into  a  trade,  they  'gendered  machines', clearly  identifying  which  machines were to be worked  by women  and which  by  men. 59 These responses,  made in order to reduce the threat  posed  by women  as cheap  labour, clearly  contributed  to the  development  of job  segregation  by  sex. 60

During the strike of  1874, the editor  of the trade  paper of the carpet  industry  stated, 'Men do not strike against their fellow workmen when the fields of labour become overfilled;  why  in  the  name  of  right  and  justice  do  they  strike  against  women?' 61 This question had a deceptively simple answer. Working men acted the way they did because it  was  not  fellow  workmen  who  were  the  threat^  but  rather  their  competitors  were women.  A  different scenario  ehacted  in  the  Nottingham  lace  industry  in  the  1880s highlights  the fact that gender  was  all-important in disputes  such as  the one  at Kidderminster.  In  order  to  escape  the  unions,  employers  in  Nottingham  moved  their machinery  into the countryside to hire non-unionized  rural workers. The  city  unionists responded by attempting to bring the country workers into their unions. 62 When women

- 56 ibid., 24 October  1874, 5.
- 58 ibid., 8.
- 57 ibid., 17 October  1874, 5.
- 59 Rose, op. cit., in press.
- 60 See Rose, op. cit. (1986);  Hartmann, op.
- cit., Rose, op. cit., in press.

6.

- 61 Kidderminster  Shuttle, 10 October 1874,
- 62 Hosiery  and  Lace  Trades  Review (June 1890), 813.

threatened  to  take  men's  jobs,  it  aroused  gender  antagonism,  and  men  responded  by excluding women,  not  by inviting  them  into  a  union.

## CHANGING  CONCEPTIONS  OF  MASCULINITY

To  understand  what  motivated  this  gender  antagonism,  it  is  necessary  to  examine popular conceptions of masculinity and the components of men's gender identity during this  period.  Pinchbeck  suggested  that  prior  to  the  Industrial  Revolution  wives  and children  were  expected  to  earn  enough  to  at  least  maintain  themselves. 63 Wives  of protoindustrial workers laboured, as did their children; household members pooled their labour  to  produce  the  products  from  which  the.family  earned  its wage.  The  same  was true of  agricultural  households in which  husbands and wives were partners in  labour. 64 More  recently,  Maxine  Berg  has  suggested  that  women  had  a  greater  role  in  preindustrial agricultural work than has been recognized and women were important, and in some  cases  held  high  status  in  pre-industrial  urban  trades. 63 The  1834  Poor  Law Amendment Act, which assumed  that families  were composed of two parents  primarily dependent  on the  father's  wage,  was reviled  by  members  of the working class. 66

The  idea that  a man  as head  of  a household  was to be solely responsible  for  earning wages sufficient  to support the entire family came into general acceptance gradually,  and was probably  not a recognized  expectation  for  many working-class men  until well  after the  middle of  the nineteenth  century.  Being the head  of a family,  and a skilled  worker, surely meant valuing  their own  individual independence, but prior to industrial transformation  it  is  unlikely  that  men  were  expected  to  shoulder  the  full  burden  of economic responsibility  for  their  families  throughout  the  family  life-cycle.

Wage and employment  security did  not characterize  most  of the skilled  trades  in the first half of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  autobiographies  of  the  working-class  men analysed by David Vincent indicated  'that constant financial insecurity was the lot even of  those working men  who had  the good  fortune  to avoid recruitment  into the ranks of the  casual  labourers  or  the  factory proletariat, and  spent  their  lives  in seemingly prosperous and well-protected skilled trades'. 67 When income or wages were  inadequate to provide for a family,  artisans might 'take a shop for their wives to manage' while they continued  at  their  regular  employment. 68 In  the  early years of  the  nineteenth  century, the wives of London tailors did not assist their husbands, who worked only on workshop premises,  but  they  did  work  as  necklace-makers,  embroiderers,  mantua-makers,  milksellers and  small shopkeepers. 69 At  a testimonial  dinner  for William  Gregory, who rose from his early years as a coalminer to become an important Nottingham lace manufacturer,  Gregory  is reported  to have  paid  tribute  to his wife,  who  had worked a stocking frame to help support the household, saying, 'if she had not been an industrious

- 63  Pinchbeck, op. cit., 1.
- 64 ibid.
- 65 Berg, op. cit., 136.
- 66 P.  Thane,  'Women  and  the  Poor  Law  in Victorian and Edwardian England', History Workshop, VI (1978),  29-53.
- 67 D.  Vincent, Bread,  Knowledge  and  Free-

dom (New York and  London,  1981), 68.

- 68 Poor Man's  Guardian, 7 September 1833, 292  as  quoted  in  I.J.  Prothero, Artisans and Politics  in  Early Nineteenth Century London (1981),  334.
- 69  Taylor, op. cit., 102.

and  economic  wife,  he  could  not  have  succeeded  as  he  had'. 70 In a  similar vein, J.B.  Leno wrote in his autobiography that he owed much to his wife in his early days as a compositor: 'How she laboured  at the press and assisted me in the work of my  printing office,  with a child  in her arms,  I have no space to tell, nor in fact  have I space to allude to the  many ways she contributed  to my good  fortune.' 71

The question  at issue here is the process whereby working-class women,  particularly married  women,  were  regarded  as essentially  unwaged  and  dependent  on  a male wage earner. We know as yet very little about this. Regional and occupational differences  may have  persisted.  However,  it  appears  that  during  the  nineteenth  century  more  sharply divided  images  of  working-class  men  and  women  emerged  -  domesticity  for  women, breadwinning  for  men.  Skilled  workers,  in  certain  circumstances,  responded  to  the economic and  social changes  confronting  them  by arguing  that they should  be  the  sole providers for  their  families.  The  ideals of domesticity for women and breadwinning  for men may well have developed  in the working classes, in part,  as responses to  industrial transformation,  especially  the  threat  posed  by  women  as  cheap  labour.  In  part,  these ideals  developed  out  of  and  were  in  harmony  with  values  which  originated  in  preindustrial  artisanal  workshop  culture. 72 At  mid-century  these  ideals  may  have  been linked to a defence  of a traditional  family  structure. At this stage it is not possible to  do more than  offer  some suggestions as to how such ideas or ideals may have emerged  as a working-class  ethos.

Prior  to  industrial  transformation  skilled  male  artisans  who  worked  in  domestic  or cottage industries directed  and  organized their family's  contributions. 73 It  was the  male head  of  household  who  possessed  skill because  it was he and his older sons who  would have been given formal training. Research on the domestic hosiery industry reveals how work  was  organized  in  the  capitalist putting-out  system.  The  husband  and father directed  the  work  of  household  members.  .Often  he  worked  on  the  most  productive frames  and  left  the  smaller,  less  productive  frames  to  his  wife  and  daughters,  who interspersed  their  contributions  to  the  household's  product  with  their  daily  household chores. 74 It  was the  father  and  husband  who  was paid  the wages by  the  hosier  for  the work done by the whole family working as a unit, and the hosier held him responsible for the completed garments. 75 As Vincent 76 describes, handloom-weavers also were paid for the work the  head  of  household  delivered  to the warehouse  and  'in  most  cases the  wife and  children  would  have  worked  in  activities,  such  as  carding  and  bobbin-winding, necessary to service the weaving of the father  at the loom'. In domestic industry,  to be a man meant  to be a skilled  worker  and  to  be the  head  of  his household's  labour  team.

Alexander 77 has  suggested  that  among  skilled  artisans  notions  of  skill  and family headship were  interconnected:

In  the  minds  of  these  different  groups  of  male workers  their  status  as fathers  and heads  of  families  was  indelibly  associated  with  their  independence  as  workers

- 70 Felkin, op. cit., 380.
- 71  Vincent, op. cit., 53.
- 72 W.  Seccombe  argues  that  the  norm  of male breadwinning  emerged  from  the ranks of skilled  artisans.  See Seccombe, op. cit., 65.
- 73 Rose, op. cit. (1986).
- 74 N.G. Osterud, op. cit.; Rose, op. cit., in press.
- 76 Vincent, op. cit., 80.
- 75 ibid.
- 77 Alexander, op. cit., 137.

through 'honourable' labour and property in skill, which identification  with a trade gave  them.

As  Hobsbawm  has  pointed  out,  'Labour  was  the  working  man's  "property"  and  to  be treated as  such, was,  of course  a  commonplace of contemporary  radical political debate.' 78 It  was his  labour  and/or  his trade  that  he  could  pass on  as inheritance  to  his sons. 79 Vincent's 80 analysis of working men's autobiographies shows the importance to a son  of  his  father's  ability  to  teach  him  his  trade,  or  to  provide  the  funds  necessary  to apprentice him to another tradesman. These autobiographies reveal the tight connection for  the  male  child  between  family  and  future  occupation  in  the  years  prior  to  midcentury.  As  Vincent 81 suggests,  security  for  a  lad  meant  the  success  of  the family economy,  headed  by  his  father,  and  it  was  to  his  father  that  the  growing  male  child would  look  for  his  only  inheritance  a  trade.  Where  the  impact  of  industrialization prevented 'a father from exercising authority over his son's occupational life, the reaction of those  involved  was  extremely  bitter'. It is no  wonder, then, that attempts  by employers  to  replace  men  by  women  or  that  conditions  of  underemployment  which forced  women  and  children  to  be  primary  wage  earners  in  their  households  met  with such  resistance.  As Vincent  put  it:

The capacity to be involved in the socialization of a child was certainly an important value. The  capacity to exercise influence  over the child's occupational  present  and future  was  a  different, though  equally  prized  value.  But  the  really  destructive element of the factory system, and in particular the early mines and mills, was . . .  it so destroyed  his economic power that it prevented  him from  performing  either role at  any  time.

In the  1830s many Owenite-influenced  unionists in Britain argued for equal wages for men and women. 83 They did not call for the exclusion of women from the workplace. An ideological  shift  may  have  occurred  in  the  1840s,  possibly  as a response  to the  turmoil between  capital  and  labour  in  the  decades  prior  to  mid-century.  This  needs  further study,  but there is evidence that unionists in a number of trades called for the exclusion of women  from their occupations. Organized working-class men supported and promoted  restrictive  labour  legislation  for  women,  which  began  with  the  1842  Mines (Regulation)  Act.  Chartists articulated  the belief  that women's proper sphere was in the home. 84

Harold  Benenson  has  suggested  that  men's  political  associations  in  the Chartist movement and in union activity strengthened their shared identity as men and promoted their common identification  as family providers. 85 It was out of such associations that the ideology of domesticity for women and breadwinning for men took root and  flourished. The  all-male  worlds  of  the  workshop  and  of  tramping  artisans  would  have  provided

- 78 E.  Hobsbawm, Worlds  of Labour (1984), 258. See also Prothero, op. cit., 27.
- 79  See Alexander, op. cit. ; Vincent, op: cit.
- 80 Vincent, op. cit.
- 81 ibid., 74.
- 82 ibid., 85-6.
- 83 Taylor, op. cit., 268.
- 85 H.  Benenson,  'Victorian  sexual  ideology and Marx's theory of the working class', International Labor and Working Class History, xxv (1984),  1-23.
- 84 ibid., 268-75.

nurturant milieux for the development of a gender ideology which sharply distinguished male  and  female  roles. 86 The  middle-class  rhetoric  about  home  and  family,  and  the woman's special place within that sphere, might have been opportunistically adopted as part  of  a political arsenal by skilled workers fighting for their livelihood, especially as it would  have  appealed  to  those  skilled  workers  concerned  with  artisanal  ideals  of respectability.  Prothero  describes the  ideals  of  respectability  held  by  London  artisans such as shipwrights as focusing  on the  notion  of independence through  a skill or trade 'which would enable them to maintain themselves and their families by their labour at a decent  level,  above  subsistence  and  with  sufficient leisure  to  engage  in  respectable activities'. 87 However,  the  glorification  and  idealization  of  home  within  working-class culture  appears  to  have  developed  slowly  after  mid-century. 88 Vincent,  for  example, noted  that  it was only among 'those autobiographers who were most preoccupied  with the ideal of respectability that we see the beginning of a move to place domestic life on a pedestal, to see it as both the source and repository of all positive values and experiences of working-class life'. 89 Why this ideal became more diffused  after  mid-century is as yet poorly  understood.

Skilled  men  argued  for  the  exclusion  of  women,  especially  married  women,  from employment on the grounds that they were to be wives and mothers, not the competitors of working men. The male counterpart to this ideology of domesticity for working-class women was the  ideal  of  male breadwinning,  which  increasingly  meant  being the  sole provider within the family. 90 In an analysis of oral histories of working-class women born between  1890 and  1940, Roberts found  that  her  respondents could  not remember their mothers working. 'Because it was generally  (and  rightly)  presumed  that a woman only worked  if  there was an  inadequate family  income,  many skilled  men  did  not  like their wives to be seen earning money -  it reflected badly on their status as the breadwinner.' 91 The idea that a man should  earn sufficient  wages so that  his wife would not have to go out to work became a significant  aspect of working-class respectability.

Several  social  historians  have  remarked  on  how  important  respectability  was  to members of the working class in mid- and  late Victorian  Britain. 92 This is subject  to a number  of  interpretations.  Crossick, for instance,  has  suggested  that the idea  of respectability was an alternative to wealth as a measure of social rank and became a way for  skilled  artisans  to  deal  with  social  inequity.  Although  the  signs  and  symbols  of working-class  respectability  may  have  resembled  the  values  of  the  middle  and  upper classes,  notions  of  respectability  were  generated  by  people  of  the  working  classes  in

- 86 See D. Thompson, The Chartists:  Popular Politics in the Industrial Revolution (New York,  1984), 130, who suggests that women may have dropped out of Chartist  politics in response to  the  growing  sense  that  men's  and  women's places were to be separate and  different,  as the world  of  work  became  increasingly  all  male.
- 87 Prothero, op.  cit., 328.
- 88 See G.S.  Jones, 'Working-class culture and working-class politics in London, 1870-1900: notes on the remaking of a working class', Journal of  Social  History, vii (1974), 460-508.
- 89 Vincent, op. cit., 55.
- 90 Seccombe, op. cit., 55.
- 91 E.  Roberts, A Woman's Place (Oxford  and New York,  1985),  137.

92 See G. Crossick, An Artisan Elite in Victorian  Society (1978);  Hobsbawm, op. cit.; Roberts, op. cit. ; Jones, op. cit. ; E.  Ross, '"Not the sort that would sit on the doorstep": respectability  in  the  pre-World  War  I  London neighbourhoods', International Labor and Working  Class  History, xxvii (Spring  1985), 39-59.

response to their experiences as proletarians. 93 As Peter Bailey has argued, some aspects of  respectability  were  put  on  for  show  and  effect in  the  presence  of  a  middle-class audience. 94 However,  as others have suggested,  no matter that 'rough' and  'respectable' elements might  both  have been  aspects of  the behaviour  of  most working-class  people, some  symbols  of  respectability  increasingly  became  intrinsic  aspects  of  working-class culture in the  last half  of the nineteenth  century  and were displayed  for  local, workingclass  consumption. 95

- G.  Stedman  Jones  argues  that  in  the  last  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  workcentred  culture  of  skilled  workers  began  to  be  replaced  by  one  oriented  towards  the family  and  home. 96 Jones  attributed  this  shift  to  a  complex  of  events,  including  the shortening  of  the  working  day,  growing  geographical  separation  between  home  and workplace, increased  spending power, and an increased division of labour between  men and  women  in which  women  were no longer  expected  to earn  money,  but  rather  were expected to remain at home to manage the money earned by their husbands. As Jones also notes, the Education Acts of the 1870s made it more difficult  for women to go out to work, leaving the household chores to older children.  Because they were to be in school, it  became  increasingly  less  possible  to  rely  on  children  to  be  regular  contributors  to household income. 98 The withdrawal of both children and wives from visible and regular employment  would  have  put  an  increasing  burden  on  men  to  be  'good  providers'.  As symbols  of  respectability  became  increasingly  focused on  the  home,  and full-time housewives were responsible for keeping up the image of respectable home life,  the role of  breadwinner  (now  envisioned  as the  sole adult  provider)  became  part  and  parcel of masculine  identity.

The  connection  between  the  ideal  of  breadwinning  and  working-class  respectability may well have been reinforced  by middle-class 'moral entrepreneurs' who promoted  the idea  that the  employment  of  married  women  was  due  to  profligate husbands. In addition, working-class leaders espoused the principle that men should be the breadwinners  and  women  should  remain  out  of  the  labour  force.  At  the  Trade  Union Congress  in  1877  Henry  Broadhurst,  in  supporting  restrictive  labour  legislation  for women,  argued:

It  was their  duty as men and  husbands to use their  utmost  efforts  to bring about a condition  of  things  where  their  wives  should  be  in  their  proper  sphere  at  home, seeing after  their  house  and  family,  instead  of  being dragged  into  the  competition for  livelihood  against  the great  and  strong  men  of  the  world. 99

- 93 Jones, op. cit.; Hobsbawm, op. cit., 242-4.
- 94 Peter Bailey,  '"Will  the real Bill Banks please  stand  up?"  Towards  a  role  analysis  of mid-Victorian working-class respectability', Journal of  Social  History, vii (Spring  1979), 336-53.
- 95 See especially  Ross, op. cit. and Jones, op. cit.
- 96  Jones, op. cit., 485.
- 97 ibid., 485-6.
- 98 As D. Rubinstein has shown, school

attendance by children of the very poor was not regular as they frequently  had to earn wages to help their families make ends meet. See D.  Rubinstein, School Attendance in London, 1870-1904 (New York,  1969), 44, 56, 89.  For resistance  to  the  demands  of regular school attendance on the part  of children  of  stockingers see  S.  Rose,  '"Proto-industry",  women's  work and the household economy', Journal  of  Family' History, in  press.

- 99 Women's Union Journal (October 1877),  72.

The  possibility  that  men  could  be  replaced  at  work  by  women  was  a  threat  to  a refashioned notion  of  masculinity  which  equated  husband  and  family  provider  and linked  these to  community  standing.  As  Barbara  Taylor  has put  it,  'The  wage-earning wife,  once seen as the norm  in every working-class household,  had  become a  symptom and symbol of masculine degradation.' 100 A letter to the Women's  Union  Journal in  1879 from  a male unionist  is  illustrative:

If a provident man like this takes up a seemingly hostile attitude towards his sisters, his  cousins  and  his  aunts  employed  in  factories,  it  may  be  for  reasons  far from discreditable  to him  as a husband  and  father  of daughters -  reasons he might  have quite  apart  from  unionism.  .  .  .  Such  a  man  might  hold  with  Comte  and  the Positivists  that  women  should  not  be  the  rival  of  man,  and  that  a  man  should support his wife entirely. Such a man might be made to feel the rivalry acutely while trying to keep his wife and daughters from  the need of going to work like men.  . . . Again if the rivalry gets too close, men will be unable to marry in any holy sense of home  life,  or  even  marry  at  all.  A  father  of  daughters  will  look  anxiously  at  a foreshadowed  public  morality  lower  than  the  highest  which  obtains  now,  among much  that  is already  low. 101

Caliban, as the writer called himself, articulated in that letter how women's rivalry in the labour market affected  men as men. It describes the images of adult manhood centred on the  capacity  to support  a family.  The  husband  was expected  to support  the wife  as his wife,  although  there  may  have  been  differences regionally  and  occupationally  as  to whether  as a father  he was expected  to support  his unmarried  daughters.

## CONCLUSION

Exclusionist  strategies  by  male  unionists  were  responses  to  a complex  mixture  of  class conflict  and  gender  antagonism.  Skilled  working-class  men  were  besieged  during  the course of industrial transformation  with multiple threats: to their livelihood, their  pride in  skilled  work,  their  control  over  the  pace  of  production  and  the  quality  of  what  was produced.  It was employers' attempts to lower the costs of  production  and  ensure  their greater  control  over  the  processes  of  production  that  created  these  threats.  Women workers  sought  employment  because  they  needed  the  wages,  and  often  took  whatever jobs at whatever prices they could get. They were used as pawns in the struggle between capital and labour. They were cheap labourers whom employers could hire to lower their costs.  It  should  also be  noted  that  employers  frequently  extolled  the  virtues  of  female workers  because  they  appeared  to  be  more  easily  controlled  and  satisfied  with  the conditions of their  employment  than  were men.  It was the  fact  that  they could  be  paid low wages  that  made  them  a direct  threat  to  men.  It  was  that  their  opportunities  for employment  were  limited  to  low-waged  jobs  that  made  them  appear  to  employers  as workers who were easily controlled. Women could be paid low wages because they were women.  They  earned  a  customary  wage,  not  one  which  was  generated  out  of  open competition  in a sexuallv  neutral  labour  market.

10 0 Taylor, op. cit., 111.

101 Women's Union  Journal (September 1879), 83.

Skilled working men responded to female competition by exclusionary tactics because it threatened them as men. In turn, what it meant to be a man was being transformed  by experiences  at  work  and  at  home.  These  experiences  were  being  moulded  by  the transition  to  industrial  capitalism.  Prior  to  industrial  transformation, masculinity  for agriculturalists  and  artisans  in  domestic  industry  meant  directing  the  labour  of  their households, and for skilled artisans generally it meant being in a position to transmit  to their  sons  the  material  means  to  be  a household  head  - a trade.  Industrial  capitalism, which  increased  employers'  control  over  men's  labour,  undermined these  bases  of masculinity.  The  threats  of  substitution  or  redundancy  because  of  women's  labour aroused gender antagonism, and a consequence was the rhetorical use of a working-class version  of  the  ideology  of  domesticity  for  women  and  breadwinning  for  men  which served to instil or legitimate these values among skilled working-class households. To  be a provider meant that a man had to have the status of a skilled worker with high enough wages so that he could  afford  to be the only wage earner. The masculine ideal of  family provider  became an intrinsic feature  of what  it meant  to be 'respectable' working class. The  competition  posed  by  female  labour  continued  to  be  met  by  exclusion  because  it threatened  these  intertwined  ideals.

As  this  study  has  suggested,  gender  issues  were  implicit  in  the  struggle  between workers  and  employers  during  the  course  of  the  Industrial  Revolution  in  Britain.  The outcome of this struggle was a working class divided along gender lines. In addition,  the connections  between masculinity  and  working-class  respectability contributed to  a working  class  divided along  occupational lines. Both  of  these  outcomes  enhanced capital's long-run advantage.  Exclusionary  strategies  contributed to restrictions on women's  labour  resulting  in  sexually  segregated  employment  which  still  remains  a characteristic feature of the labour market. The vehemence with which business interests oppose equal pay initiatives, which  counter the pay differentials  that  are a consequence of  job  segregation  by  sex,  suggests  that  gender  divisions  within  the  workforce  remain advantageous  to  capital.

Colby College