## LAND, LABOR, AND LOVE: Household Arrangements in Nineteenth Century Eastern Finland-Cultural Heritage

## or Socio-Economic Structure?

## BEATRICE MORING

ABSTRACT: The article examines the relationship between household arrangements, marriage, and the economy in Virolahti in eastern Finland, where household forms superficially resemble the large and complex households found in Russian serf populations to the east. In Virolahti, however, the age at marriage was higher than in the Russian populations, and the choice of partner was made by the young couple, not by the parents. The absence of serfdom and corve 'e labor linked household size and economic needs more directly with ecology and resources than was the case within a system where the wishes of a landlord had to be taken into account. During the nineteenth century, joint-family households were replaced by stem families as the need for a large work-force diminished with the replacement of slash-and-burn agriculture with set field agriculture. Cultural influences on household forms were less important than economic factors.

When John Hajnal wrote his famous study on European marriage and household patterns, he decided to exclude Finland on the assumption that marriage and fertility patterns of Finns differed from those of western Europeans with their prudent system of marriage. Together with a number of other scholars, he viewed these questions mainly in geographic and cultural terms. The so-called Hajnal line was drawn through Europe from St. Petersburg to Trieste, which would leave Finland on the western side of it. Hajnal expressed some doubt, though, as to whether Finland really should be placed in Eastern or Western Europe (Hajnal 1965, 1983).

Beatrice Moring is Visiting Research Associate at the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure, 27 Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1QA, England.

THE HISTORY OF THE FAMILY An International Quarterly, Volume 4, Number 2, pages 159-184 Copyright GLYPH&lt;211&gt; 1999 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved. ISSN: 1081-602X

Emmanuel Todd, on the other hand, firmly relegated Finland to the group of countries dominated by eastern traditions in ownership and living arrangements (Todd 1985, p. ix). Information forthcoming from Finland has not been overwhelming, except perhaps for some demographic data, and it is not surprising if the line has remained a bit blurred in this part of the world.

In an article from 1975 Andrejs Plakans expressed concern about the scanty data on household systems in Eastern Europe. Plakans himself has added considerably to our knowledge on the situation in the Baltic area. Russian data are also now available. The multiple family and joint family households in these regions generally existed within the framework of the serf system. The existence of corve 'e labor and the power of the landlord over individuals, as well as on the size of the land units, have been considered major factors affecting household organization. Plakans has stressed the importance of the large household units as one element of the strategies of the peasants for guaranteeing their survival and well-being when faced with the demands of landlords. These units were often composed of kin and related and non-related farmhands in the Baltic area while they were almost totally kin-based in the Russian context (Plakans 1975, pp. 9-13, 17-18; 1983; 1987, pp. 168-170; 1992, pp. 206-209, 212-215; Plakans and Wetherell 1992; Czap 1983, pp. 145-149; Kula 1976, pp. 194-197). When analyzing Hungarian localities, Andorka considered technology, serfdom, and inheritance patterns as factors encouraging the development of multiple-family households (Andorka 1976, pp. 338-341). In a later study, he was able to correlate the presence of large complex households with large wealthy peasant farms and simple households to those of landless cotters (Andorka and Farago 1983, pp. 294-295, 302-306). In some parts of Estonia, stem-oriented household arrangements (i.e., parents co-residing with a married heir) played an important role in the nineteenth century. The difference in status between the firstborn son and other siblings could be considerable, with the younger ones reduced to the status of servants. On the other hand, joint-family households with grown-up siblings were more frequent on the islands in northern Estonia than in other parts of the country, even though the serf system dominated the economy both in the north and the south (Kahk and Uibu 1986, pp. 37-39, 61-64, 71-73).

Household systems in the Balkans, particularly the zadruga , have generated a lot of interest among scholars for more than a hundred years. These joint households with co-residing brothers have been viewed variously as the embodiment of the Slavic soul, the trademark of the virtue of certain nationalities in the area, a result of the serf system, and a byproduct of the espousal of a particular religious creed (views effectively criticized by Todorova 1993, pp. 159-169). Todorova has shown that the zadruga as an important institution can be found only in certain regions and that, in general, it does not coincide with political, religious, or ethnographic boundaries on the Balkan peninsula. Nor does the presence of serf estates account for the existence of the zadruga. On the other hand, there seems to be an indisputable connection between the existence of joint-family households and pastoralism (Todorova 1993, pp. 148-150, 152-156; Kaftanzoglou 1994, pp. 80-83).

Todorova is also very critical of the many misuses of the word zadruga , as is Jasna Capo Zmegac. Capo Zmegac emphasizes the need to understand that the term zadruga refers not to a household with a certain structure but a household

with common property and a certain type of inheritance pattern. In Croatia of the past, multiple-family households which were not zadrugas did exist, as did small households that were zadrugas (Capo Zmegac 1996, pp. 378-379). In an examination of the household structure in Cernik in northern Croatia, Capo Zmegac reached the conclusion that in the same cultural environment, within the serf economy, two household types can be detected. The landless urban serfs generally lived in nuclear or extended households while landholding rural serfs resided in large multiple households. In times of crisis different strategies were adopted but these essential patterns reappear through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Capo Zmegac 1996, pp. 386-392; see also Gavazzi 1980).

It does seem that the reasons for forming joint family households varied in eastern and east-central Europe in the past, as did the number and percentages of these households in the different localities (Todorova 1993, p. 111; Capo Zmegac 1996, p. 386). Mitterauer has analyzed the underlying mechanisms of the multiple family and joint-family households of eastern and central Europe in the past (Mitterauer 1981). His conclusions are that simple ethnic or geographic models of explanation are worthless. Urban wage-laborers formed smaller and more nuclearized households than the rural population, whatever their ethnic origin. The political situation on the military border in the Balkans, as well as the economic and ecological restraints on the pastoralists, have been of great importance for the creation and preservation of patrilinear joint-families. The interests of feudal lords in preventing the fragmentation of landholdings when they passed from one generation to the next have helped in some areas to encourage the maintenance of large household groups. Mitterauer has also drawn our attention to the ways in which joint-families were preserved by artificial means, through adoption and contractbased brotherhood in different environments (Mitterauer 1981, pp. 59-60, 64, 67-69, 71-77). Within Austria, several different household patterns can be detected, one of which favors the co-residence of adult and sometimes married siblings, although it should not be seen as a non-Balkan zadruga. Mitterauer stresses the need to be aware of the role of the economy in connection with ecology as a major factor influencing the size and composition of the household. (Mitterauer 1986, pp. 209, 255, 303; Mitterauer 1992, pp. 142, 149-150, 154-155, 157; Wall 1984).

## FINLAND EAST AND WEST

Finland has been viewed sometimes as a part of Scandinavia, and other times as existing within the Russian sphere of influence (Wall, Robin, and Laslett 1983, pp. 53, 60; Gunnlaugsson 1988, p. 134; Rogers 1993, pp. 284-285; Hajnal 1965; Todd 1985). The system of landownership in western Finland was similar to that of Sweden, since the two countries formed one political and legal unit for six hundred years. The majority of holdings were crown farms that could be transmitted from one generation to another. The child who succeeded to the headship of a farm supported his aging parents and younger siblings, with the support and the unpaid work performed during the headship of the father constituting the payment for the farm. Legal restrictions were placed on the division of a crown farm so that only one child could claim it, although co-residence between siblings was possible. The

system of cohabitation between parents and the family of one child can be documented for localities in various parts of Finland (Aarnio 1991, p. 57-61; NallimaaLuoto 1990, pp. 68-69; Virrankoski 1961, pp. 96-97; Jutikkala 1957, pp. 191-195; 1980; Matinolli 1969, p. 167; Moring 1989, pp. 107-112; 1993; 1994, pp. 56-63; Pylkka nen 1990, p. 362; Tegengren 1943, pp. 62-64; Heikinma ki 1981; Murto 1929; Turpeinen 1981; Virrankoski 1973).

Although the province of Viborg in southeastern Finland was totally under Russian domination for almost one hundred years, it was never fully incorporated into Russia's administrative and economic structures. Side by side with estates of Russian landlords, there were freeholds owned by the farmers, and crown farms of the traditional Fenno-Swedish type. Activity by the Russian nobility resulted in large number of crown farms becoming tenant farms, but the right of the peasants to leave the estate could not be circumscribed. The farmers could be evicted but could never be forced to stay. They were not transformed into serfs (Jutikkala 1958, pp. 358-364; Kaukiainen 1987, pp. 263-264; Voionmaa 1922, p. 222).

The eastern part of Finland has been considered the core area of large and complex households, and this article will examine questions related to household arrangements, marriage, and economy in the province of Viborg in the past. It will also touch upon certain stereotypes that have been associated with patrilocality. The study is focused on a local community, the parish of Virolahti, on the present day Russian border (see Figures 1 and 2). The work forms a part of ongoing research into the nature and determinants of eastern and western types of household arrangements within Finland, the impact of these patterns on socio-economic development, how progress through the early stages of the life-cycle was affected by the different residence patterns, and the extent of the difference between the Finnish experience and marriage and household patterns in other parts of Europe.

The discussion of family patterns in this article will be conducted largely from a socio-economic perspective, specifying the interaction between people and resources or economic opportunities. The influence of legal factors and inheritance practices will also be analyzed, together with information about local customs. Tradition or culture, however, is not an explanation in itself. It does not exist in a specific geographic region without a reason and should be seen in a wider context. When examining legal practices, a distinction should not only be made between theory and practice, but the influence of local power structures have to be made clear if we are going to infer anything about the preferential behavior of groups or individuals. When property is transferred, the inclination of the individual might be consistent with the law and with local custom, but the intervention of a landowner might make either option impossible. Likewise a change in economic circumstances might alter customary behavior.

## THE SOURCES

The Reformation and the Lutheran church in Sweden and Finland, placing an emphasis on the contract of the individual with God and His word as embodied in the Bible, resulted in a campaign within the Church to promote reading. This gradually evolved into a system within which the parishioners' knowledge of the

FIGURE 1

<!-- image -->

Map of Finland with present day boundaries showing location of Viborg.

central articles of Christian faith were tested on an annual basis. As part of this process, documentation was required that listed all inhabitants household by household, noting movements into and out of households as well as into and out of the parish. The registers (communion books) were in use during five- or ten-year periods and makeit possible to follow households over time, where necessary in combination with listings of births, deaths, and marriages. The oldest communion books in Finland go back as far as the seventeenth century, but many parishes do not have continuous registration until the second part of the eighteenth century. The quality of the actual registration is good. The existence of the communion books made it easier to keep track of the whereabouts of the parishioners and their church attendance. Given the domination of the Lutheran Church in Finland, the question of nonconformity (and consequently evasion of the registration system on the grounds of adherence to a different church) does not arise. Admittedly, in eastern Finland

FIGURE 2

<!-- image -->

Parish of Virolahti in Province of Viborg with boundaries of Finland in 1743, 1811 and 1944.

members of the Orthodox Church were present in some numbers. They were concentrated in the area north of Lake Ladoga and in the area close to St. Petersburg, and not in the region were Virolahti parish is situated.

In 1635 a new head tax was introduced, which with some exceptions had to be paid by all persons of working age (over fifteen years). People over 63 who claimed that they were supported by their children could be excluded. The taxation records are listings of individuals within each household, because the head of the household was responsible for the payments of all persons who lived under his roof. The quality of the records varies by region and from year to year (Lext 1968). In the province of Viborg major changes were made in the taxation system during the second part of the eighteenth century but in 1818 the old taxation system was reintroduced and for the first time these taxation lists include information about all individuals.

Analysis of household structures produces such quantitative data as numbers and percentages, but the human relationships which give rise to these structures have to be inferred. In the case of Virolahti, the historian is singularly fortunate in that both quantitative and qualitative data have survived for the same time period. The qualitative evidence comes from a unique account of local customs by an extremely well-informed native of Virolahti. Eljas Raussi was born in Virolahti in 1800. Although born the son of a farmer, he spent a large part of his life in business in town. Later, however, he returned, married a woman from the parish,

and ended his days in the household of one of his relatives after losing most of his money. Having made contacts with a number of people who were taking an interest in local customs, he started to write a book about the everyday life, economy, material culture, and customs in his home parish. The result, a manuscript of 1300 pages, was published a hundred years after his death. The advantage of this type of description is that it is not the work of an outsider but somebody who, although critical in some cases, understood the inner dynamics of the life he is describing (Raussi 1966; Kaukiainen 1970, pp. 632-637).

## LAND, POPULATION, AND ECONOMY

The basis of taxation in the kingdom of Sweden, into which Finland had been incorporated at the end of the twelfth century, was the farmers. All state tax was based on land, with the consequence that the clergy and the few burghers did not contribute much. The nobility was exempted from taxes. During the period of almost constant warfare in the seventeenth century, when the boundaries of Sweden expanded and numerous men were lost on the battlefields of Europe, the population at home lived under constant pressure. When the taxation demands could not be met year after year, a vast proportion of the freeholds both in Sweden and Finland were converted into crown land. The life of a crown farmer was not significantly different from that of a freeholder. The rights to stay on the farm or turn it over to one's offspring in old age were reasonably secure as long as the taxes were paid. When taxes were left unpaid for three years, the decision about who would be an appropriate successor lay with the local court. However, close relatives, such as sons, sons-in-law, or brothers had prior claim to the land, in accordance with the concept of the 'birth-right' of the family to land that their ancestors had been cultivating for generations. If close relatives were unwilling to take the land, more remote family members had to be asked before it could be turned over to strangers. As the owner, the crown was able to restrict the partitioning of the farms and the establishment of sub-units. In some cases, permission to divide the farm could be granted when an application was submitted to the Provincial Governor or his administrative officers (Jutikkala 1958, pp. 51-52, 144-150).

## POPULATION AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IN EASTERN FINLAND

The population density in the province of Viborg was more or less the same as in the other parts of Finland in the early eighteenth century. Throughout the period of Russian domination (1720/1743-1811) hardly any restraint was put on the division of farms, and their numbers more than doubled from 4,751 in 1750 to 11,124 in 1818 (Table 1). Population expansion in the 22 parishes of the province was equally dramatic, from 59,400 to 124,200 persons. Age at first marriage was generally low and the birth rate varied between 40.2 and 46.6 in the region from 1754 until the second half of the eighteenth century (see Tables 2 and 3). It is not possible to say whether this expansion had been caused by the tribulations of the early eighteenth century-associated with warfare, plunder, and disease-with the population expanding into the vacated niches. There were a number of abandoned farms after

TABLE 1 Number of Farms 1750-1840 in the Province of Viborg.

|   Year |   Virolahti |   Prov. of Viborg |
|--------|-------------|-------------------|
|   1750 |         232 |              4751 |
|   1780 |         416 |              7369 |
|   1818 |         603 |             11124 |
|   1840 |         611 |             11722 |

Sources: Kaukiainen 1987, p. 287.

the Russo-Swedish war 1741-1743, and, indeed, there was a boom in the number of marriages in the 1750s (Kaukiainen 1987, p. 277). Until the 1780s the creation of more units was also favored by the fact that much of the tax burden was placed on the farm and not on the individual. When a farm was divided, the two halves each paid one half of the original tax. With another division, each unit paid a quarter of the taxes despite the fact that the area of cultivation had increased. From the 1780s until Viborg's reunification with the rest of Finland in 1811, the Russian person-based taxation was enforced. This led to considerable tax increases in the initial phase, but the amounts payable lessened over time because of inflation of the ruble (Kaukiainen 1970, pp. 445-449).

The changes brought by reunification resulted in increased security of property rights and the right to have cases tried by an independent court. The majority of farms in the region were freeholds, but crown land turned over by Catherine II to Russian noblemen before the reunion could not be reclaimed. The decision-makers in Petersburg were unable or perhaps unwilling to understand Nordic conceptions of the birthright of farmers to their holdings. Although serfdom had not been introduced, the farmers remained tenants of the Russian noblemen and the latter retained the right to raise land rents at will and insisted on having the rent paid in work-days instead of cash. In the 1860s, following the initiative of the assembly of estates ( Lantdag ), farmers were granted favorable loans by the Finnish central government (the senate) which made it possible to buy back land from the Russian owners (Kaukiainen 1987, p. 264; Kaukiainen 1970, pp. 507-515; Jutikkala 1958, pp. 358-367; Voionmaa 1922, p. 222).

A negative side of the unification from the point of view of the farmers was the reintroduction of the restrictions on the partitioning of farms. The process slowed down and the number of farms increased slowly in comparison with the eighteenth

TABLE 2 Vital Rates per Thousand, Province of Viborg.

| Years     |   Crude Birth Rate |   Crude Death Rate |
|-----------|--------------------|--------------------|
| 1756-1780 |               45.2 |               30   |
| 1791-1805 |               46.6 |               33.4 |
| 1821-1830 |               37   |               27.5 |
| 1831-1840 |               31.7 |               30.5 |

Source: Kaukiainen 1987, p. 289.

TABLE 3a Mean Age at First Marriage of Women in the Province of Viborg.

| Years     |   Mean Age |
|-----------|------------|
| 1754*     |       21.7 |
| 1818*     |       22.3 |
| 1800-1820 |       22   |
| 1830-1839 |       24.1 |
| 1840-1849 |       24.1 |
| 1850-1859 |       25.3 |
| 1860-1869 |       24.8 |
| 1870-1879 |       24.5 |
| 1890-1899 |       25.2 |

Notes: * 5 1754 and 1818, sample of 9 parishes in Karelia, marriage cohorts; other numbers refer to Virolahti parish and birth cohorts.

Sources: Kaukiainen 1987; Notkola 1989 p. 75; parish registers Virolahti.

century, from 11,124 in 1818 to 11,722 in 1840. The growth rate of the population fell by more than a half-ten percent in twenty years instead of 25 percent in seventeen years-bringing the population to 137,720 persons in 1840 (Kaukiainen 1987, pp. 265, 286). Such partitioning of farms as took place was still accompanied by the clearing of new fields for cultivation. The area under cultivation grew by fifteen percent between 1830 and 1880. Untouched areas for slash-burn cultivation, however, were not easy to find. Already in the 1820s the stage had been reached whereby the return to the same woods occurred too frequently and the output in grain diminished to almost one half of former returns. The rising prices on woodproducts also resulted in a change in attitudes towards the use of woodland. Gradually, the economy had to be converted to set-field agriculture. The new economic challenges were met by concentration on cattle-raising and the export of butter to St. Petersburg, an increase in transportation work, and in woodcutting (Kaukiainen 1987, p. 271; Soininen 1974, pp. 382-385).

In the long run, this led to changing demands on the work force as the slashand-burn agriculture employed primarily men, whereas set-field agriculture had less need of manpower once the fields had been cleared. Milk production, on the other hand, increased the demand for female workers. The birth rate fell in the 1820s to between 24.2 and 32.3 in the province of Viborg, but it was no longer feasible to settle all the children on farms. Eighteen percent of the population

Completed Marriage.

TABLE 3b Median Age at First Marriage of Women in Virolahti, and Average Number of Children per

|              | Farmers   | Farmers   | Landless   | Landless   |
|--------------|-----------|-----------|------------|------------|
| Birth Cohort | Age       | Children  | Age        | Children   |
| 1830-1849    | 21.3      | 6.8       | 23.3       | 5.2        |
| 1850-1869    | 23.0      | 6.8       | 24.6       | 5.7        |
| 1890-1909    | 24.3      | 3.3       | 24.1       | 3.8        |

Source: Notkola 1989, p. 76.

belonged to the landless group in 1840. Toward the end of the nineteenth century the age at marriage of farmers wives started to rise (Kaukiainen 1987, pp. 277, 281; Notkola 1989, p. 76; Moring 1995, p. 254) (see Table 3).

## AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY

The basis of the economic expansion of southeastern Finland in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had been slash-and-burn agriculture. It had a crucial role during the eighteenth century and it still played an important role at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Thirty percent of the agrarian output in the coastal parts and 50 percent in the interior of the province of Viborg came from fields of this kind. The slash-and-burn system was favored in rye cultivation because of the generous yields. One of the reasons for the location of these economic pursuits were the abundant woodland resources on the Russian border. Slash-and-burn agriculture can indeed be found in a number of localities on the Scandinavian peninsula in the iron age and during the Middle Ages, as it was a logical way of expanding cultivation into woodland areas and converting them into set fields. The techniques for making use of evergreen forests, however, did not evolve until the sixteenth century, and formed the basis for Finnish settlements in the previously unexploited parts of Savo in east-central Finland, Karelia in eastern Finland, and Va rmland in Central Sweden (Soininen 1961, pp. 137-138; Saloheimo 1986, pp. 9-18). For evergreen and mixed forest over 40 years old the main method was huuhta. The clearance period lasted three years and consisted of the felling of smaller trees, the stripping of the bark off the big ones, burning, and finally the sowing. Only one or two harvests could be obtained but the yield/seed ratio of twenty or even 40 was very favorable. A major disadvantage of the slash-and-burn system however, was that not all of the area could be cultivated because of stones and tree-stumps. This means that the ratio of output, compared with what could be obtained from a set field cleared of all obstructions (which would have a yield/ seed ratio of five), was not as favorable as it might seem.

The older type of clearing methodkaski -was carried out in deciduous forests, generally birch, from fifteen to 35 years old. Clearance lasted only one year. All the trees were felled and in the second year the burning and sowing was carried out. A kaski could be used one year for rye, one for barley, and perhaps two years for oats, but the yield would not be that of the dimensions of a huuhta. For another year or two the animals would be allowed to graze the area, and then it would be left to return to forest. Whether kaski or huuhta , the felling of the trees and the rolling of burning tree-trunks to make the fire spread evenly over the ground, and the transporting of suitable tree-trunks, was the work of hefty males. But when the fire had been lit everybody had to take part in the work-men, women, and children. Both systems, however, required a large work-force, and not only family members but also the landless could be occupied on seasonal basis. It is also necessary to keep in mind that several huuhtas had to be worked simultaneously in order to have one ready for sowing every year. Although work-intensive, the methods had decided advantages. The crop was far better than in a set-field system and plentiful enough to feed even a large working unit. There are indications that there was an

increase in the number of slash-and-burn fields in the eighteenth century, accompanying the increase in population (Soininen 1961, pp. 138-155).

The necessary requirement for a successful pursuit of the slash-and-burn system was sufficient woodland areas into which to expand. Such forests were still present in some parts of eastern Finland in the early part of the nineteenth century, but in the province of Viborg they were becoming scarce. The beginning of a shift from extensive to intensive farming, against the background of an increasing population in the Boserupian sense, can be observed.

The labor-intensive activity that gained importance from the second half of the eighteenth century was the clearing of new fields for permanent cultivation. The division of farms was accompanied by an intensive field-clearing and between 1770 and 1830 the cleared area was increased by 185 percent. Bogs were drained, ditches dug, and the kyto maa technique (the burning of bogland areas) introduced (Raussi 1966, pp. 80-81). The shift towards set-field agriculture was accompanied by more emphasis on cattle raising and milk production. While the slash-and-burn system was in operation, there was no occasion to search for fertilizers because the burned trees produced the necessary nutrients. When the system went into decline, however, manure was required for the fields and the cow became an essential part of the economic life, both for its manure and as a source of surplus dairy products that could be sold in St. Petersburg.

## LAND OWNERSHIP AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE IN VIROLAHTI

A large proportion of the farms in Virolahti were crown farms throughout most of the eighteenth century. In the 1790s large estates were created in the form of land grants by Catherine the Great to noble Russian families. These grants comprised about 28 percent of the land in the parish but within ten years the estates were sold on to Finnish merchants from the region. The latter were not interested in corve 'e labor or its equivalent, and stipulated that rent should be paid in cash and some agricultural products-the classical tax payments in Finland. Although the payments demanded by the estate owners were higher than the tax payments of ordinary crown farmers, the modes of payment interfered very little with everyday life and the ability to tend to their own work. (Kaukiainen 1970, pp. 513-515).

Although large parts of western Finland experienced a considerable growth of the landless during the latter part of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century (Moring 1994; 1996, pp. 98, 102-107), the situation was very different in the east. In Virolahti the landowning part of the society more than doubled in numbers between 1755 and 1818. In 1840 more than 70 percent of the population belonged to the landholding group. Although there was hardly any increase in the number of holdings between 1818 and 1840, adult married children could reside with their parents within the existing system. The households of farmers contained on average nine members in 1818 and ten in 1840 (see Table 4). In 1851, 35 percent of these households were still multigenerational and a considerable proportion contained co-residing landless individuals, who usually lived in households of a simpler structure.

TABLE 4 Mean Household Size in Virolahti 1818-1876.

|      |   Farmers |   Inmates |   Crofters |   Craftsmen |   All hsh. |
|------|-----------|-----------|------------|-------------|------------|
| 1818 |       9.1 |       3.3 |        7   |         6.7 |        8.4 |
| 1838 |      10   |       3.4 |        7.6 |         4.4 |        8.6 |
| 1851 |       9.4 |       3.9 |        6.2 |         3.3 |        8   |
| 1876 |       8.1 |       3.5 |        4.7 |         5.1 |        6.2 |

Sources: Tax registers.

## INHERITANCE

The Eastern Finnish concepts of land ownership, transfers, and inheritance were deeply embedded in the local economic structures and might also partly have been influenced by the proximity of Russia. In theory, inheritance law was the same as in the western part of Finland, but practice differed considerably. Some traits are indeed similar to the laws regulating common ownership and division of property and the legal position of women in some parts of the Balkan peninsula (Todorova 1993, pp. 128-130, Kaftanzoglou 1994, pp. 93-94; Mitterauer 1981, pp. 70-71).

The economic basis for settlement in the area had originally been total reliance on slash-and-burn agriculture. As long as there were still sufficiently mature woods to burn, the only limits for expansion were connected with the size of the work force. The larger the work-group the greater the area that could be burned for cultivation. The wealth of the household was therefore dependent on the number of adult men in the household. The amount of land under cultivation could also vary from year to year. Measuring prosperity on a long-term basis was indeed difficult, and the system that developed within this economic framework viewed all adult men in a household as having an equal share of crop, money, and tools, while women were excluded from ownership of all land and buildings. The share of each man was based on his input of work and could therefore be taken out if he decided to leave the household. Likewise, it was possible for an individual to join another household through marriage or on a contract basis, and to bring to the new household the share of tools, money, and grain which he had taken from his earlier household. Once a share had been taken, whether from the parental household or another, no further claim could be made on the assets of the household in question. Ergo , a son who had left could not return on the death of his parents to claim a share. Everything was divided between those who resided in the household at a given time. On the other hand, if an individual married and worked and resided in the household of his wife's parents, his share would be equal of that of her brothers. If a couple was childless or all children died or departed, the children of sisters and brothers could be retained in the household, or total strangers taken in and granted the legal status of offspring through adult adoption (Jutikkala 1958, pp. 55-57; Letto-Vanamo 1995, p. 159).

Womenwereexcluded from the ownership of land and inheritance of it. A dowry in cattle, money, and textiles was paid out when a woman left her parental home. The composition of the dowry took account of the woman's sphere of activity within the economic system. On the other hand, if her husband died prematurely, a woman

TABLE 5 Households with Two or More Married Couples in Eastern Finland

(Karelia)-16th And 17th Centuries.

| Household   |   Year | %                |
|-------------|--------|------------------|
| Lappvesi    |   1556 | 31               |
| Ja aski ¨   |   1635 | 36.6             |
| Muolaa      |   1680 | 34.4             |
| Uusikirkko  |   1680 | 47.8             |
| Kivinebb    |   1680 | 51.8             |
| Ruokolahti  |   1660 | 51.0 ext 1 mult* |
| Ruokolahti  |   1675 | 53.0 ext 1 mult* |
| Ruokolahti  |   1694 | 68.0 ext 1 mult* |

- * ext 1 mult 5 households with a nuclear family and additional unmarried relatives and households with several married couples. Categories 4 and 5 of the Laslett-Hammel classification system.

Sources: Immonen 1958, pp. 88-90; Ka ho nen 1959, pp. 729-731; Voionmaa 1915, pp. 390-400; Moring 1989, pp. 108-109; Pylkka nen 1990, p. 362.

might for a time take control of the household and its affairs while her children were minors. In the event of remarriage, she was expected to take up residence with her new husband's family (Jutikkala 1958, pp. 55-57; Pylkka nen 1990, pp. 191-192; Nyga ˚rd 1989, p. 29; Ma kela ¨ 1989, p. 187).

Although the relative importance of slash-and-burn agriculture had decreased considerably by the nineteenth century and set field agriculture had strengthened its position, inheritance customs were not altered.

## HOUSEHOLD STRUCTURE

Eastern Finland has been considered the area par excellence for large multiple households or joint families. A large proportion of the households were either extended or multiple during the second half of the eighteenth century. In the seventeenth century as many as 60 percent were extended or multiple in some parishes (Table 5; see also Appendix). Farming and crofting households in the province of Viborg contained on average 11.2 members in 1750 (Kaukiainen 1987, p. 267). Servants were rare, constituting no more than five percent of the population in the seventeenth century, a smaller proportion than anywhere else in the country (Nyga ˚rd 1989, pp. 85-86).

The patterns of co-residence were patrilocal. Many farmers were able to accommodate one or two of their children and their families in the parental home, and later on prepare the division or settle so-called surplus children on newly established farms carved out of the old one. Daughters were generally married out of the household. Unmarried daughters were supported in the parental household after parental death by their brothers or uncles. When a family had only daughters, the sons-in-law could be taken into the household (see Tables 6, 7, and 8). The relative frequency of horizontally extended households, however, weakened the position of women, because even if their father had been head of the household and there were no brothers, there was always the danger that the father would be succeeded by his brother and not by the daughter's husband. In general, it seems that the

property, wherever possible, was transferred to the next generation, either to a son or son-in law, and preferably to the oldest son of the oldest son. (Jutikkala 1958, pp. 55-58; Communion books Virolahti 1800-1820; Raussi 1966, p. 469) The usual time for transmission of the headship was on the death of the father. Occasionally, widows with grown-up sons can be found heading households, but it was more usual for them to reside within the household of a father in-law or a brother-inlaw (Pylkka nen 1990, p. 319).

The percentage of multiple family households in early nineteenth-century Virolahti was about as large as it had been two centuries earlier (Tables 5 and 6). The household might be extended horizontally, vertically, or both horizontally and vertically. In 1818 fourteen percent of all the households in Virolahti consisted of three or more related families. Sixteen percent of all households, some including three or more related families, contained married brothers with or without parents (Table 8). The rarity of co-resident married cousins indicates that the more remote the relationship, the higher the likelihood of separation, either through one family moving out or by the partitioning of the farm. In considering the frequency of household fission it must be kept in mind that all families did not have sons who married, and that the custom of the daughters moving out also limited the constant branching out of the household.

Life-cycle service was unusual in the area and the landless part of the population was small and marginal during the eighteenth and at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Servants constituted about 4.4 percent of the population in 1755 and 38 percent in 1818; they were found in fifteen percent of the households in the latter year. In 1876 only twelve percent of the households included servants (Table 9; Kaukiainen 1970, p. 421).

In the early decades of the nineteenth century, the landless part of the population in Virolahti was still small and its impact on the general household structure marginal. Farmers needed large households and were also able to support them within the framework of the prevailing land clearance system, with additional income derived from supplying the growing St. Petersburg population with dairy products (Karste-Liikkanen 1968, pp. 119-136, 151-187; Kaukiainen 1970). Complex house-

Household Structure in Virolahti 1818-1876, Percentages.

TABLE 6

|      | Household   | Household   | Household      | Household         | Household         | Household   |     |
|------|-------------|-------------|----------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------|-----|
| Year | Solitaries  | No family   | Nuclear Family | Extended Family * | Multiple Family † | Other       | N   |
| 1818 | 1.9         | 1.9         | 32.8           | 11.9              | 48.5              | 2.6         | 427 |
| 1838 | 3.2         | 2.7         | 35.1           | 14.3              | 39.8              | 4.3         | 490 |
| 1851 | 4.0         | 2.3         | 38.7           | 13.1              | 36.3              | 4.8         | 620 |
| 1876 | 7.4         | 1.4         | 51.5           | 14.3              | 23.5              | 1.4         | 921 |

Note:

* 5 a conjugal family unit with the addition of one or more relatives other than offspring; † 5 two or more conjugal family units connected by kinship or marriage. This classification is explained in Laslett and Wall 1972, pp. 29-31; N 5 total number of households. The present study includes about 75% of the villages in Virolahti.

Sources:

Taxation records, communion books.

Coresidence Of Relatives In Relation To Socio-Economic Status Of Household Head, Percentages Virolahti 1818-1876.

TABLE 7

|          | Grandchild   | Married Son   | Married Brother   | N   |
|----------|--------------|---------------|-------------------|-----|
| Farmers  |              |               |                   |     |
| 1818     | 29.3         | 27.9          | 22.1              | 358 |
| 1838     | 24.2         | 22.6          | 25.3              | 359 |
| 1876     | 25.4         | 24.5          | 11.8              | 473 |
| Inmates  |              |               |                   |     |
| 1818     | 4.2          | 0             | 0                 | 48  |
| 1838     | 7.1          | 5.9           | 0                 | 84  |
| 1876     | 2.8          | 2.8           | 0                 | 286 |
| Crofters |              |               |                   |     |
| 1818     | 14.0         | 14.0          | 0                 | 7   |
| 1838     | 10.7         | 10.7          | 14.3              | 28  |
| 1876     | 15.4         | 17.5          | 2.0               | 97  |

Sources: Tax registers (analysis of a sample of 75% of the households in Virolahti parish).

hold forms-the three-generational household, households with married and unmarried brothers and sisters-dominated (Table 7, 8, and 10).

When the data are arranged according to the socio-economic status of the households, it emerges that the large and complex households were primarily those of the farmers and that these were also the households which were most likely to contain co-resident married brothers. Many farmers shared their households with married sons but this pattern was much rarer among other social groups. The presence of grandchildren was also naturally highest in the households of the landholders (Table 7). In addition to the households composed of two or more related families, there were other households containing two or more married couples co-residing on the basis of a contract in return for participation in the economic activities of the farm. These couples may or may not have been related

TABLE 8 The Percentage of Households Including Relatives of Specified Types, Virolahti 1818, 1838, 1876.

|                      | 1818   | 1818   | 1838   | 1838   | 1876   | 1876   |
|----------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
|                      | %      | N      | %      | N      | %      | N      |
| Mothers              | 21.8   | 93     | 10.8   | 53     | 7.6    | 70     |
| Fathers              | 0.9    | 4      | 0.8    | 4      | 2.8    | 26     |
| Brothers married     | 18.5   | 79     | 19.6   | 96     | 6.2    | 58     |
| Brothers unmarried   | 15.4   | 66     | 8.4    | 41     | 6.6    | 61     |
| Sisters married      | 2.5    | 11     | 3.1    | 15     | 1.1    | 10     |
| Sisters unmarried    | 17.8   | 76     | 15.1   | 74     | 9.1    | 84     |
| Sons married         | 23.6   | 101    | 18.2   | 89     | 15.6   | 144    |
| Daughters married    | 7.4    | 32     | 5.7    | 28     | 3.2    | 30     |
| Grandchildren        | 25.3   | 108    | 19.8   | 97     | 15.6   | 144    |
| Children of siblings | 24.6   | 105    | 24.5   | 120    | 8.0    | 74     |

Sources: Tax-registers, Virolahti.

TABLE 9 Households with Servants in Virolahti.

|   Year |   N |    % |
|--------|-----|------|
|   1818 |  38 | 15.2 |
|   1838 |  40 | 15.1 |
|   1851 |  41 | 12.1 |
|   1876 |  57 | 11.9 |

Sources: Tax registers, communion books, Virolahti (calculated for a sample of 60% of the households).

to each other. On this point the enumeration remains silent and in Table 6 such households are listed under the heading 'Other.'

## LIFE, LOVE, AND POWER IN AN EASTERN FINNISH CONTEXT

When studying households and family life in the past, historians often have only census-type data on which to rely for information about the everyday life of ordinary people. Sometimes legal records or accounts by travelers or social reformers are available, but very seldom are the voices of the people themselves heard. Especially for Eastern European environments, information about interaction between individuals in multigenerational joint families in the historical past is not abundant (Plakans 1987, pp. 171-172). In Eljas Raussi's account of the customs, attitudes, and everyday life of the people in Virolahti, there are present the insights of a person describing his own environment. Even though he had become literate not only in the technical sense like his fellow parishioners, but in a more fundamental sense of the widely informed, and though he was capable of writing on a number of different subjects, his writing about his native area was in the practical, spoken language. He communicated with ethnographers and collectors of folklore, but he remained close to his roots. His hope was that a higher degree of cleanliness and a lesser degree of superstition would be attained, but his aim was only to relate, not to shock in order to attract readers, as was the case with the traveling journalists writing accounts of Old Finland or reform-minded doctors taking part in discussions on health problems (Kaukiainen 1969, pp. 184-185, 198-200). Raussi was a man of the people and we can rely on his knowledge and awareness of his society.

## MARRIAGE

When marriage in the past has been analyzed, one of the key issues has been the extent of parental influence on the timing of marriage and the choice of the partner. Especially in societies where the newly married are young and the couple has moved in with the parents-in-law, parental influence has been assumed to be great, and it has been alleged that the marriages were arranged by the parents.

In Finland, however, another force affecting the marriage was the Lutheran church. Marriage in the past was impossible without confirmation, and confirmation was impossible without a rudimentary ability to read the Bible. The first teachers were the parents but the testing the level of biblical knowledge was done by

## Socio-Economic Distribution of Households in Virolahti.

TABLE 10

|   Year |   Farmers |   Inmates |   Crofters |   Craftsmen |   Others |   N |
|--------|-----------|-----------|------------|-------------|----------|-----|
|   1818 |      83.8 |      11.2 |        1.6 |         1.4 |      2   | 427 |
|   1838 |      73.2 |      17.1 |        5.7 |         2   |      2   | 490 |
|   1851 |      67.9 |      22.9 |        2.6 |         2.7 |      3.9 | 620 |
|   1876 |      51.4 |      31.1 |       10.5 |         3.1 |      3.9 | 921 |

Sources: Tax registers.

the clergy (Raussi 1966). A sample from Virolahti consisting of the birth cohorts 1800-1856, shows an average age at confirmation of sixteen for both sexes. In the same sample the average age at first marriage was 22 for women and 26 for men, higher for the landless and lower for the farming population (Communion Books Virolahti 1800-1820). The situation was very much the same for those born between 1830 and 1850 (Notkola 1989, p. 76).

Although the age at first marriage was quite low for women in Virolahti in comparison with large parts of western Europe, the brides were young adults, not teenagers as in the Russian societies examined by Czap (Czap 1978, 1983). Patrivirilocal residence was still frequent in the 1840s, but Raussi makes clear that the choice of partner was subject to the individual likes and dislikes of the young people themselves. The marriages were not arranged by the parents as was the custom in the geographically not very distant northern Russia (Cistov 1976, p. 209; Czap 1983, pp. 118-120; Raussi 1966, p. 278).

The oldest son was always expected to marry first, but once that marriage had taken place the field was fairly open for the younger siblings. When there were many sons, a son who was going to marry out of the household would not have to wait for the heir to marry first.

The formal approval of the parents for the marriage was needed, and in the ceremony of the public proposal the parents were approached first. Once their consent to the proposal was forthcoming, the engagement gifts were handed to the prospective bride, who had the right to return them within three days. If they were retained, the agreement was considered to be concluded and steps were taken for the banns to be read.

The actual choice of partner was made by the young people themselves at the dance- and play-evenings arranged by the unmarried, at work-parties, or when visiting friends and relations. Many contacts were established at church holidays, when people from other villages spent the night visiting. After the selection had been made, the young man and woman got to know one another by meeting in the woods 'accidentally,' by visiting mutual friends, and by spending the night together when the girls were sleeping separately from the rest of the family in summertime (Raussi 1966, pp. 271-275, 278-281).

Although young males in Virolahti boasted to one another about the favors granted by girls, especially 'girls from other villages,' a considerable part of the reports of this kind were largely fantasy. Custom and practice did not allow total freedom in sexual relations before marriage. An illegitimate child created a number

of problems for a young woman. Good-looking seducers of low social origin with no prospects of marriage were seen as the greatest danger for morality, as were the Russian soldiers during times of war. Boys from families with a good reputation were believed to have honorable intentions and could also be subjected to social pressure. After the choice of partner had been made, control on the actions of the young couple was minimal. Virginity was valued highly by some people but had no decisive importance on the marriage market. The wedding ceremony did not include the displaying of visible proof of virginity, as in some parts of the Russian area (Raussi 1966, pp. 275-279, 310-312, 319; Talve 1987, p. 150). In the 1850s about eight percent of the brides in Virolahti were expecting a child. The frequency was somewhat lower among the girls from the landholding than from the landless part of society. The rates increased over time to about 40 percent around World WarI(Notkola 1989, pp. 81-84). In comparison with the western part of the country, however, with established night-courting practices and sexual relations from the time of betrothal, premarital relations were probably less frequent (Wikman 1937, pp. 184-185; Talve 1979, pp. 177-179; Moring 1994, pp. 110-111; Boetius-Murenius 1908, pp. 61, 193, 215-216; Klingius 1986, p. 48; Sjo berg 1984 [1925], pp. 36-40; Halmesmaa 1978, pp. 54-57).

Marriage was an honorable estate separating people into two groups. It was considered a holy estate, and was symbolized by the headgear of the married woman (retained even in the twentieth century by older women, although diminished in size for practical purposes). Married women were not to be touched by men other than their husbands, which was a useful custom during intervention in conflicts. Physical love was indeed considered to be an essential part of marriage, and physical attraction between partners something that was not only accepted as permissible but laudable (Raussi 1966, pp. 262, 265).

Apart from the general duties within the household, the married couple had certain practical duties towards each other. The wife made and maintained her husband's clothes, the husband made and maintained the boots and gloves of his wife. The personal pride of the couple was closely linked to these activities, as was praising the partner to other people and going together for Holy Communion. Such practices declared to the society the bonds between the couple. When disputes arose, there was no way of concealing them from the rest of the household and the people in the village. Opinions were then expressed and sides taken by other people (Raussi 1966, pp. 263-266).

## THE TRANSFER OF THE HEADSHIP OF THE HOUSEHOLD

In a region with a high frequency of patrilocal multiple and joint family households, it was only the fortunate who would ever succeed to the headship of a household. To reach that position during the early part of one's life was highly unlikely. Household heads did not retire, but once attaining the headship remained in that position for the rest of their lives (Voionmaa 1915, pp. 187-203). The average age of all male household heads was 47 years in Virolahti in 1818 and that of the farmers higher still (Table 11). The proportion of households with grandchildren and married sons relative to the proportion of households with fathers or mothers also reveals

TABLE 11 Average Age of Household Heads in Virolahti.

|   Year | Female   |   N |   Of Which Widows | Male   |   N |   Of Which Widowers |
|--------|----------|-----|-------------------|--------|-----|---------------------|
|   1818 | 48.6     |  11 |                 9 | 47.2   | 239 |                  18 |
|   1838 | 51.7     |  57 |                53 | 48.0   | 208 |                  18 |
|   1851 | 53.0     |  97 |                95 | 49.0   | 240 |                  24 |
|   1876 | *        |  93 |                90 | †      | 385 |                  30 |

Note:

Sources:

Tax registers.

the fact that the headship of households in general rested with the older generation (Tables 7 and 8).

According to Raussi, the custom dictated that at the funeral of the household head or mistress, the assembled villagers, after consultation among themselves, grabbed the oldest son or son-in-law, daughter, or daughter-in-law, lifted the person up on a table and declared him or her head or mistress. In cases where the nearest in line of the next generation was not suitable, and the actions and attitude of the former head had indicated that a younger son or daughter should be chosen for the task, the villagers would usually refrain from any 'lifting,' in view of the bad feelings that might arise (Raussi 1966, pp. 468-470).

## OWNERSHIP AND DIVISION OF LABOR

Ownership of movable and immovable property, and living arrangements, could be quite complicated in these joint families. The house and outbuildings were owned jointly. The household could also be described as kattilakunta (those who share a pot) or leipakunta ¨ (those who share bread). Meals were prepared by the women of the household, and were eaten together with the head of the household at the head of the table-men at one end, women and toddlers at the other end, and other children at a separate table. Individual spoons were used for soups and porridges but the food was served up in one bowl for the men and one for the women. The work pattern made it necessary for men to take some meals away from the house, but, especially on Sundays, the communal meal and the grace were considered important (Raussi 1966, pp. 159-161, 254).

The household head had a separate room where he slept together with his wife and received important visitors. The other grown-up men owned their tools and had small huts or sheds which were their private property and in which they kept personal items. These sheds were also used as sleeping quarters by them and their families in summertime, when nearly everybody moved out of the house, and by newlyweds even during the cold part of the year (Raussi 1966, pp. 14-16).

The livestock was partly communal and partly individually owned. The cows belonged to the house in general and were tended by the women. Sheep were brought into the farm as part of the dowry of a woman. These sheep and their progeny remained as her personal property, as did their wool, which only she spun.

* 5 No information about age, except the number of individuals over the age of 63; † 5 20 female household heads and 36 male household heads were over 63.

The herding of these animals was the work of young women and children. If children of suitable age could not be found within the household, a child from outside could be hired for the purpose at a very low cost. The male attitude to sheep was often negative, since sheep were considered to be totally within the woman's domain but because in winter they ate the hay that would have better supported more useful animals. The dual usefulness of cows was realized by the time of the early nineteenth century. The dung was used as fertilizer on the fields, and the larger the set fields, the greater was the need. Milk products played an important part in the local diet, and butter could be marketed in the towns. Men made the necessary repairs to the cow-sheds and assisted the women when the animals were ill. Otherwise the boundary between gender-based division of labor was crossed only in emergencies (Raussi 1966, pp. 47-53, 80).

The division of labor demanded a certain balance between men and women in the household. Men would not have any part in work connected with cows or sheep, while the driving of horses, buying and selling, plowing and sowing, were considered men's work, and not to be taken on by women except in emergencies. The main responsibility for the well-being of milk cows, feeding them when with calf, calving, preserving the milk supply, and milking itself lay with the mistress of the house. The number of tasks were numerous in a big household, however, and several women were needed to provide for all members of the household; to feed, clothe, clean, tend to children and animals; and to take part in hay-making, harvesting, burning of woods for field-clearing, fishing and other activities (Raussi 1966, pp. 46-51, 315-316).

## CONFLICT

Amarried person had the status of a full adult, but membership in a large domestic group necessitated a high degree of complicated interaction. The daughter-in-law has been seen as the victim of the mother-in-law and the sisters-in-law-scorned by everybody-an attitude reflected in traditional poetry. In a household with married sons, conflict was unavoidable. Different interest groups would form and dissolve depending on the life-cycle of the family. Sometimes the older generation would support the youngest couple in the group, knowing that their position would be the weakest. Sometimes the unmarried daughters would side with one of their brother's wives, sometimes with another, particularly if the one in question had young unmarried brothers or close male relatives. These friendships or interestlinkings could result in marriages and the formation of more permanent cliques (Raussi 1966, pp. 260-262, 317).

If a conflict was of a long-standing nature, could not be resolved, and affected the capacity of the household to function, an agreement could be made to divide the household and the farm. A number of these agreements were purely oral. Each part of the property was discussed, and a decision taken as to what would be part of the old and what of the new farm. If an agreement could not be reached, independent outsiders or friends, or representatives of the local court, would be called in. Once an agreement had been concluded, which could include communal use of certain buildings until the new household had erected its own, the households

moved apart and from that moment functioned as separate units (Raussi 1966, pp. 255-257).

## SOCIAL CHANGE AND THE HOUSEHOLD

The joint-family household system was in time eroded by the social and economic changes that altered life in eastern Finland (cf. Lindgren 1984). The process of proletarianization started earlier in the west, but by the end of the nineteenth century the possibilities for economic expansion in the east had come to an end. The number of farms had become more or less stationary. Surplus children could not expect a future in the parental home. The crofting system ameliorated the process of social decline, but the children of crofters had little hope for upward movement (Gylling 1909). There was a rapid increase in the landless-25 percent of the working men at the end of the nineteenth century and 40 percent at the beginning of the twentieth were landless in Virolahti.

An overview of the socio-economic status of the household shows that there was a numerical and proportional increase of landless households (Table 10). This resulted in a decline in the average size of the household and an increase in the number of nuclear households. The mean size of the farmers' households also fell, however, as did the proportion of horizontally extended household groups (Tables 4, 7).

In the province of Viborg, 55 percent of the population was landless in 1912 and almost 90 percent of the landless population consisted of cottars (who did not own the house they lived in) and 'inmates' ( loiset , who resided in the household of somebody else). The disappearance of slash-and-burn agriculture decreased the supply of seasonal work and intensified pauperization of eastern Finland, changes that attracted the attention of the authorities. There were large numbers of landless at the turn of the century in other parts of the country, but at least they often had a roof over their heads. The inmates in eastern Finland were dependent on other people providing them with a corner in their house or the right to live in the sauna. The paupers of the east became a major concern of the 1901 Committee for the Landless Population (Kaukiainen 1987, p. 281; Soininen 1974, pp. 390-394; Favorin 1992, pp. 176-177).

Until the 1850s, the poor-relief system in Virolahti had been of the traditional kind. The old and frail who had no relatives were taken in by one farm and then another, and those in need of temporary assistance received grain or money from the parish three times a year. Between 1839 and 1867 restrictions were put on the in-migration of paupers. The idea of the poorhouse was not popular in the parish, but, following persuasion from the state poor-relief inspector, such an institution was established in 1902. It resulted in a temporary disinclination to seek assistance and the poorhouse mainly catered for the old and feeble, and for some orphans (Favorin 1992, pp. 188-192).

Increasing job opportunities within the quarrying sector, on the sea, and in the sawmills which were founded in the 1880s and 1890s and in the first decade of the twentieth century made it easier for those of working age in Virolahti to make a living. In the province of Viborg in general there was migration temporarily or

permanently both to Viborg and St. Petersburg (Favorin 1992, pp. 115-119, 124-127, 172-173).

## CONCLUSION

Within the boundaries of present-day Finland it is not possible to move further to the southeast or closer to St. Petersburg than Virolahti. The parish shared the fate of a number of other localities in the Baltic region of being part of the Russian Empire during at some point in the past. The incorporation differed from that of the localities on the southern side of the Baltic in that it was of shorter duration and did not affect the ownership of land to the same extent. Yet the similarities of certain features of this region with those forming the identification marks of the eastern European household system are obvious. During a considerable part of the nineteenth century, the frequency of multiple family households, extended vertically and horizontally, was very high. The age at first marriage of women was low, and the patrilocal residence pattern predominated. The inheritance system favored men to a considerable degree, and communal ownership of land among men of the same family was frequent in the landholding group. A closer view, however, reveals that in comparison with Russia, for example, the age at first marriage was higher and the choice of partner that of the young couple, not the parents. The absence of serfdom and corve 'e labor made the connection between household size and economic needs more directly linked to ecology and resources, than was the case within a system where the wishes of a landlord had to be taken into account. The differences between age at marriage and the household system of the landholding group, and those of the landless, also indicates that although local culture may have played an important role, the economy should definitely be seen as the major factor. The large multiple and joint-family households were well adapted to an economic system where exploitation of large woodland areas was possible. As long as the size of the work-force was the factor determining the size of the area that could be cultivated there was no need to control family formation. If the family produced sons who then fathered further sons, the holding could be divided if and when the household grew too large. As long as resources allowed, most sons could be kept in the household and their future secured. Land-clearance and farm-division, during the late eighteenth century and the early decades of the nineteenth century, postponed the moment when farmers had to witness their children experiencing loss of status. The multiple family households with co-residing brothers created a system with considerable capacity for taking care of the old and the young. The head of the household never retired but died as head. Old brothers and uncles could also stay in the household all their lives and their widows remained there unless they remarried.

During the nineteenth century, the fre 'reches ' and joint-family households began to transform into stem families along on the lines evident in other parts of the country. One son took over. Younger siblings stayed in the parental household until their marriage. The need for a large work-force diminished, as the nonavailability of woodland resources made a change in the economic system necessary and new units could not be created ad infinitum. A prudent marriage pattern took

its first hesitant steps. The girls in Virolahti born in the 1890s married at the age of 25 and gave birth to between three and four children. When the possibilities of expansion came to an end, the region that supported a system of complicated household groups was faced with the necessity of adopting new patterns.

As additional information comes to light about life in various parts of historic Eastern Europe, the clearer it becomes that the Eastern European household system was not one, but many. To understand the underlying mechanisms, not only do the size and structure of the household, residence patterns, and ages at marriage have to be examined, but also the basis for everyday existence. A similarity of household structure is not always the same as an analogy. Life in what was superficially a patriarchal unit did not necessarily entail loss of power and personal choice. In the past, as today, it was necessary to adopt strategies that made it possible to live with economic, ecological, and legal constraints. Collaboration with kin was in some instances the best way to deal with this situation.

## APPENDIX

## HOUSEHOLD STRUCTURE

The Laslett-Hammel system of household classification (Laslett and Wall 1972, pp. 1-69) has been used in this article to make it possible to compare structures of the households in eastern Finland with those in other places.

The co-residence patterns in eastern Finland varied to a considerable degree from those of the English communities for the analysis of which the system was originally devised. The nature and complexity of the family and kinship relations in Virolahti takes us far outside the groupings that were envisioned within categories 4 and 5 of the Laslett-Hammel system. To avoid the loss of information, tables stating the presence of certain groups of kin have been added, as the extensions did not only include children or siblings of the household head, but also uncles, widows of brothers, aunts, aunts by marriage, and even second cousins.

It is necessary to remember, however, that the household classification systems of present-day research had no place in the universe of Eljas Raussi or the realities of everyday life in Virolahti of the 1840s. The movement of a household from category 3 to category 5 did indeed encompass a number of events for the household in question: in particular a son marrying and bringing in his spouse, or a daughter marrying and leaving the household to join another. Raussi's description of the attitudes of the people involved shows us families in which the parents might have liked to keep their daughters with them and sometimes postpone the marriages of their sons, but the young wanted to marry and the parents gave in. The household had no beginning and no end, but was gradually transformed by individuals moving in and out. Only when the house and land were divided was a new unit started. Raussi saw the household as a system of parents with children, a system that perpetuated itself. When the old generation became really old, the grandchildren already approached adulthood and marriage. No man was an island. The natural unit was a collective with men women and children of different ages occupying different positions within a complex system.

## REFERENCES

Aarnio, Aulis. 1991. 'Perimysja rjestelyt maanomistusolojen kannalta.' Pp. 43-65 in Suomen oikeushistorian pa apiirteet ¨ , edited by P. Letto-Vanamo. Helsinki: Gaudeamus.

Andorka, Rudolph. 1976. 'The Peasant Family Structure in the 18th and 19th Centuries.' Acta Ethnographica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 25: 321-348.

Andorka, Rudolph, and Tamas Farago. 1983. 'Pre-industrial Household Structure in Hungary.' Pp. 281-307 in Family Forms in Historic Europe , edited by R. Wall, J. Robin, and P. Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Boetius-Murenius. 1908. Acta Visitatoria 1637-1666, edited by Ka ¯arlo Osterbladh. Helsinki: Soumen Kirkkohistoriallinen Seura.

Capo Zmegac, Jasna. 1996. 'New Evidence and Old Theories: Multiple Family Households in Northern Croatia.' Continuity and Change 11(3): 375-398.

Cistov, K.V. 1976. Vena lainen perinnekulttuuri. Neuvostoliiton Pohjois-Euroopan vena la is-va eston etnologiaa 1800-luvulta 1900-luvun alkuun. Helsinki: Suomen Kirjallisuuden Seura.

Czap, Peter. 1978. 'Marriage and the Peasant Foint-family in Russia.' Pp. 103-123 in The Family in Imperial Russia , edited by D. Ransel. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Czap, Peter. 1983. ''A Large Family: The Peasants Greatest Wealth': Serf Households in Mishino, Russia, 1814-1858.' Pp. 105-151 in Family Forms in Historic Europe , edited by R. Wall, J. Robin, and P. Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Favorin, Matti. 1992. Virolahden historia II. Mikkeli: Virolahden kunta.

Gavazzi, Milovan. 1980. 'Die Mehrfamilien der Europa ischen Vo lker.' Ethnologia Europaea XI:2.

Gylling, Edvard. 1909. Suomen torpparilaitoksen kehityksen pa a piirteet. Helsinki.

Hajnal, J. 1965. 'European Marriage Patterns in Perspective.' Pp. 101-143 in Population in History , edited by D. V. Glass and D. E. C. Eversley. London: Arnold.

Hajnal, J. 1983. 'Two Kinds of Pre-Industrial Household Formation System.' Pp. 65-104 in Family Forms in Historic Europe , edited by R. Wall, J. Robin, and P. Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Halmesmaa,Pekka. 1978. Kirkkokurisa a nnosto Suomessa 1848-1869. ¨ Helsinki: Suomen Kirkkohistoriallinen Seura.

Heikinma ki, Maija-Liisa. 1981. Suomalaiset ha atavat. Helsinki: Somen Kirjallisuuden Seura. Immonen, Toivo. 1958. Kurkijoen kihlakunnan historia II. Pieksa ma ki:Hiisi-Saatio.

Jutikkala, Eino. 1957. Ha meen historia 2:1. Ha meenlinna: Hameen-Haimolitto.

Jutikkala, Eino. 1958. Suomen talonpojan historia. Turku: WSOY.

Jutikkala, Eino. 1980. 'Suurten sotien ja asutusexpansioiden kaudet.' Suomen taloushistoria

I

,

edited by Eino Jutikkala, Yrjo Kaukiainen, and Sven Erik Astro m. Helsinki: Tammi.

Kaftanzoglou,

Roxane. 1994. 'The Household Formation Pattern of a Vlach Mountain

Community of Greece: Syrrako 1898-1929.'

Journal of Family History

19(1): 79-98.

Ka honen, Ester. 1959. ¨

Vanha Ayra pa a vuoteen 1700.

¨

¨

Helsinki.

Kahk, Juhan, and Hallikki Uibu. 1986. 'Familiengeshichtliche Aspekte der Entwicklung des

Bauernhofes und der Dorfgemeinde in Estland in der ersten Ha lfte des 19 Jahrhunderts.'

Pp. 31-101 in

Familienstruktur und Arbeitsorganisation in la ndlichen Gesellshaften

,

ed-

ited by Josef Ehmer and Michael Mitterauer. Bo hlau: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht.

Kaukiainen, Yrjo ¨ . 1969. 'Vanha Suomi ulkomaisten matkailijoiden kuvauksissa.' Pp. 184-207

in

Historiallinen Arkisto

64. Helsinki: SHS.

Kaukiainen, Yrjo ¨ . 1970. Virolahden historia I. Lappeenranta: Virolahden kunta.

Kaukiainen, Yrjo ¨ . 1987. 'Population growth and land availability in south-east Finland 1750-1840.' Pp. 263-289 in Evolution agraire et croissance demographique , edited by A. Fauve-Chamoux. Liege: Ordina Editions.

˚

Karste-Liikkanen, Greta. 1968. Pietari suuntaus kannakselaisessa ela ma nkentassa 1800-luvun ¨ loppupuolelta vuoteen 1918. Helsinki: Sumen Muinaismuistoyhdistys.

Klingius, Erik. 1986 [1750]. Historisk beskriftning o fver Malax fo rsamling. Vasa: Malax commun.

Laslett, Peter, and Richard Wall, eds. 1972. Household and Family In Past Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lext, Go sta. 1968. Mantalsskrivningen i Sverige fram till 1860. Go teborg: Ekonomisk-Historiska institutionen vid Go teborgs Universitet.

Lo fgren, Orvar. 1969. 'Fra ˚n nattfrieri till tonarskultur.' ˚ Fataburen . Pp. 25-52.

Matinolli, Eero. 1969. Suur-Pyha joen historia vanhimmista ajoista 1860-luvulle. Kokkola: Pyha joen Kunta.

Mitterauer, Michael. 1981. 'Komplexe Familienformen in sozialhistorischen Sicht.' Ethnologia Europaea XII:1.

Mitterauer, Michael. 1986. 'Formen la ndliche Familienwirtschaft im o sterreichischen Raum.' Familienstruktur und Arbeitsorganisation in la ndlichen Gesellschaften , edited by Ehmer and M. Mitterauer. Bo hlau: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht.

Mitterauer, Michael. 1992. 'Peasant and Non-peasant Family Forms in Relation to the Physical Environment and the Local Economy.' Journal of Family History 17(2):139-159.

Moring, Beatrice. 1989. 'Fiske och fiskarhusha ˚ll i Finland.' Pp. 103-122 in Kustbygd i fo randring 1650-1950. Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet.

Moring, Beatrice. 1993. 'Household and Family in Finnish Coastal Societies 1635-1895.' Journal of Family History 18(4): 395-414.

Moring, Beatrice. 1994. Ska rgardsbor. ˚ Familj, husha ˚ll och demografi i fila ndsk kustbygd 1635-1920. Helsingfors: Finska Vetenskaps-Societeten.

Moring, Beatrice. 1995. 'Geographical and Social Differences in Age at Marriage and Fertility in Finland during the 18th and the 19th Centuries.' Scandinavian Population Studies 10: 249-259.

Moring, Beatrice. 1996. 'Marriage and Social Change in Western Finland 1700-1870.' Continuity and Change 11:1.

Ma kela, Anneli. 1989. Suvusta perheeseen, Satakunnan ja Karjalan naisen asema 1500-luvulla. Helsinki: Suomen Historiallinen Seura.

Nallimaa-Luoto, Terhi. 1990. Ha meenkyro n historia 1722-1865. Vammala: Ha meenkyro n kunta.

Notkola, Irma-Leena. 1989. Luonnollisesta hedelma llisyydesta lapsirajoitukseen. Helsinki: Suomen Va esto tieteen Yhdistys.

Nyga ˚rd, Toivo.1989. Suomen palvelusva ki 1600-luvulla. Hesinki: Somen Historiallinen Seura. Plakans, Andrejs. 1975. 'Peasant Farmsteads and Households in the Baltic Littoral 1797.' Comparative Studies in Society and History 17(1): 2-35.

Plakans, Andrejs. 1983. 'The Familial Contexts of Early Childhood in Baltic Serf Society.' Pp. 167-206 in Family Forms in Historic Europe , edited by R. Wall, J. Robin, and P. Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Plakans, Andrejs. 1987. 'Interaction between the Household and the Kin Group in the Eastern European Past: Posing the Problem.' Journal of Family History 12:1-3: 163-175. Plakans, Andrejs, and Charles Wetherell. 1992. 'Family and Economy in an Early Nineteenth Century Baltic Serf Estate.' Continuity and Change 7(2): 199-224.

Pylkka nen, Anu. 1990. Puoli vuodetta, lukot ja avaimet. Helsinki: Lakimiesliiton kustannus. Raussi, Eljas. 1966. Virolahden kansanela ma a 1840-luvulla. Helsinki: Suomen Kirjallisuuden Seura.

Rogers, John. 1993. 'Introduction.' Journal of Family History 18:283-290.

Saloheimo, Veijo. 1986. 'Savolaxarnas expansion pa ˚ 1500 och 1600 talen.' Pp. 7-22 in Va rmlandsfinnar. Stockholm: Kulturfonden fo r Sverige och Finland.

Sjo berg, H.R.A. 1984[1925]. Livet bland Kvarkens so ner och do ttrar I. Vasa: Fo reningen Brage.

Soininen, Arvo. 1961. Pohjois-Savon asuttaminen keski ja uuden ajan vaihteessa. Helsinki: Suomen Historiallinen Seura.

Soininen, Arvo. 1974. Vanha maataloutemme. Helsinki: Suomen Historiallinen Seura.

Soininen, Arvo. 1987. 'Morsiamesta nuorikoksi: ha iden rakenne ita merensuomalaisilla.'

Scripta Ethnologica 37.

Talve, Ilmar. 1979. Suomen kansankulttuuri. Turku: SKS.

Tegengren, Helmer. 1943. Kronoby sockens historia. Kronby: s.n.

Todd, Emmanuel. 1985. The Explanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social Systems. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Todorova, Maria N. 1993. Balkan Family Structure and the European Pattern. Washington: American University Press.

Turpeinen, Oiva. 1981. 'Ha iden aika ja avioitumisika Suomessa.' Pp. 168-200 in Pohjolan Ha at ¨ , edited by Matti Sarmela. Helsinki: Suomen Kirjallisuuden Seura.

Virrankoski, Pentti. 1961. Kokkolan pita jan yla osan historia. Kokkola.

Virrankoski, Pentti. 1973. Pohjois-Pohjanmaan ja Lapin historia III. Oulu.

Voionmaa, Va ino ¨ . 1915. Suomen Karjalaisen heimon historia. Helsinki: s.n.

Voionmaa, Va ino ¨ . 1922. Suomen Talousmaantieto. Porvoo: s.n.

Wall, Richard, Jean Robin, and Peter Laslett. 1983. Family Forms in Historic Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wall, Richard. 1984. 'Real Property, Marriage and Children: The Evidence from Four PreIndustrial Communities.' Pp. 443-479 in Land, Kinship and the Life-cycle , edited by R. Smith. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wikman, Robert K.W. 1937. Die Eileitung der Ehe. A ˚ bo: Abo Akademi. ˚