<!-- image -->

## ORIGINAL PAPER

## Re-examining appropriate mechanization in Eastern and Southern Africa: two-wheel tractors, conservation agriculture, and private sector involvement

Frédéric Baudron 1 &amp; Brian Sims 2 &amp; Scott Justice 3 &amp; David G. Kahan 1 &amp; Richard Rose 4 &amp; Saidi Mkomwa 5 &amp; Pascal Kaumbutho 6 &amp; John Sariah 7 &amp; Raymond Nazare 8 &amp; Girma Moges 9 &amp; Bruno Gérard 10

Received: 10 November 2014 /Accepted: 29 May 2015 /Published online: 27 June 2015 # Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht and International Society for Plant Pathology 2015

Abstract The need for sustainable intensification in Eastern and Southern Africa (ESA) is widely recognized as a requirement to achieve food security with minimum negative social and environmental consequences. In current Research &amp; Development programs, much emphasis is placed on increasing the efficiency with which land, water and nutrients are used, whereas farm power appears to be a ' forgotten resource . ' This is a major concern when farm power in ESA countries is declining due to the collapse of most tractor hire schemes, the decline in number of draught animals and the growing shortage of human labour. A consequence of low levels of farm mechanization is high labour drudgery, which makes farming unattractive to the youth and disproportionally affects women. Undoubtedly, sustainable intensification in ESA will require

*

Frédéric Baudron

f.baudron@cgiar.org

- 1 CIMMYT-Ethiopia, Shola Campus, ILRI, P.O. Box 5689, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
- 2 FAO Mechanization Consultant and Engineering for Development, Bedford, UK
- 3 CIMMYT-Nepal, Khatmandu, Nepal
- 4 iDE-Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh
- 5 ACT, Nairobi, Kenya
- 6 KENDAT, Nairobi, Kenya
- 7 SARI, Arusha, Tanzania
- 8 UZ, Harare, Zimbabwe
- 9 EIAR, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
- 10 CIMMYT-Mexico, El Batan, D.F., Mexico

an improvement in access to farm power. In this paper, we suggest this can be achieved through the use of small, multipurpose and inexpensive power sources such as two-wheel tractors (2WTs) coupled with the promotion of energy saving technologies such as conservation agriculture (CA), whilst ensuring the profitability for farmers, service providers and other private sector actors in the supply chain. We argue that appropriate mechanization in Africa, a paradigm largely abandoned three decades ago, may be re-examined through the combination of these three elements.

Keywords Powertiller . Drudgery . Intensification . Reduced tillage . Notillage . Business model

## Introduction: appropriate mechanization in Africa, past and future

The promotion of large-scale mechanization in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) in the 1950s and 1960s raised concerns over possible undesirable consequences (e.g., labour displacement, consolidation of small farms) and led to the emergence of what has been coined ' appropriate ' mechanization in the 1970s and 1980s (Mrema et al. 2008). However, none of the small machines that were developed during that period, including a number of ' mini-tractors , were successful in the ' market (Holtkamp and Lorenz 1990). More than 20 years after the apparent failure of appropriate mechanization in Africa, this paper proposes to re-examine the topic in the context of modern-day developments in the agricultural sector, as new challenges and new opportunities have arisen.

## Increasing food production in SSA will require an increase in available farm power

Although food production in SSA is increasing, population growth in the region outstrips food supply (ca. 3 % vs. ca. 2 %, Tittonell and Giller 2013; Fig. 1a). The gap between food demand and food supply is not being met through trade, as demonstrated by the steady rise of the numbers of undernourished people in SSA in the past decades (FAO 2009; Fig. 1b). In addition, relying on trade exposes SSA countries to food price volatility (Abbott and de Battisti 2011). In 2007 -08, peaks in international grain prices were transmitted to domestic food markets in SSA, eroding the purchasing power of urban and rural households (Minot 2011) and sparking food riots in several countries (Berazneva and Lee 2013). Notwithstanding the importance of global and regional trade, a concerted effort is needed to enhance agricultural production and productivity in SSA to address the region s food security ' concerns. As noted by Clarke and Bishop (2002), an increase in agricultural output usually requires additional farm power.

However, SSA farmers are not only under pressure to produce more: they also have to produce differently. Whereas the rural population of SSA has increased at an average rate of 2 % per annum between 1968 and 2000, the urban population has increased at an average rate of 5 % per annum during the same period (Tiffen 2003). As a result, consumers of agricultural products are increasingly urban (Fig. 1c). This demographic shift has two implications for SSA farmers: a change in demand for agricultural commodities, for example for more

milled and polished grains (Popkin and Bisgrove 1988), and greater need for transport from the farms to the centres of demand (Tiffen 2003). More processing and more transport to satisfy urban demand obviously require more power.

## Could farm power be one of the most limiting factors in smallholder farming systems of Eastern and Southern Africa?

Although most of the issues discussed below are common in SSA, to develop our argument we will focus on Eastern and Southern Africa (ESA) in the rest of the paper. The tremendous increase in the value added by agriculture (i.e., the net output of the sector after adding up all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs), particularly over the past decade (Fig. 1d), has made investment in agricultural inputs such as mineral fertilizers possible in countries such as Ethiopia and Kenya. However, in contrast with other countries that experienced the Green Revolution (e.g., India), the farm power available per area of agricultural land in ESA has been stagnating over the past three decades (Fig. 2). In many countries, the number of four-wheel tractors (4WTs) in 2000 was the same (e.g., Malawi) or even lower (e.g., Tanzania) than in 1980 (Fig. 2a). In other countries, the number of 4WTs has increased between 1980 and 2000, but not at a rate commensurate with the increase in agricultural land area (e.g., Zimbabwe). During the same period, the number of draught animals on the African continent has stagnated, or even

Fig. 1 a population trend in six countries of Eastern and Southern Africa from 1960 to 2010 (source: World Bank, 2011); b trend in the number of undernourished people in sub-Saharan Africa from 1992 to 2007 (source: FAO 2009); c trend in the number of urban persons per active person in agriculture in six countries of Eastern and Southern Africa from 1980 to 2010 (calculated from World Bank, 2011); and d trend in the value added by agriculture (i.e., the net output of the sector after adding up all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs) in six countries of Eastern and Southern Africa from 1980 to 2010 (source: World Bank, 2010)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Comparison of a the density of tractors, b the density of cattle and buffaloes -proxy for the availability of draught power, and c the density of economically active people in agriculture in six countries of Eastern and Southern Africa, compared to India (calculated from FAOSTAT, 2012)

<!-- image -->

declined (Fig. 2b). As a result, agriculture in ESA increasingly relies on human muscle power. Although labour availability has increased in many countries, with the number of economically active people in agriculture rising faster than the cultivated area (e.g., Kenya, Tanzania), it has decreased in others (e.g., Zimbabwe; Fig. 2c).

The quality of labour has also deteriorated in most of ESA as a result of an ageing population (stemming from rural -urban migration, Table 1) and HIV/AIDS (Table 2). Female headed households are also quite common in ESA and are particularly labour constrained (Table 2). Many rural families in ESA also rely in part on non-farm income. This is particularly the case of poorer households and of small farms in semiarid areas, where income diversification is a strategy to spread risk (Tiffen 2003; Fig. 3). These non-farm activities may compete for available labour with on-farm activities. The extreme

Table 1 Mean age of rural household heads in 14 areas targeted by the ACIAR a -funded SIMLESA b project in Eastern and Southern Africa. Standard deviations are given after the signs ' ± . (source: SIMLESA, 2014) '

| Country    | Area                   | Age of rural household heads   |
|------------|------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Ethiopia   | Pawe                   | 42.8±13.6                      |
|            | Bako                   | 40.1±13.1                      |
|            | Adami                  | 41.9±13.4                      |
|            | Hawassa                | 41.0±12.8                      |
| Kenya      | Western                | 48.4±15.2                      |
|            | Eastern                | 48.1±14.5                      |
| Malawi     | Lilongwe-Ntcheu        | 40.2±13.7                      |
|            | Kasungu-Mchinji-Salima | 40.3±15.2                      |
|            | Balaka                 | 44.1±16.6                      |
| Mozambique | Manica                 | 48.0±15.5                      |
|            | Tete                   | 44.4±15.3                      |
|            | Sofala                 | 44.5±14.6                      |
| Tanzania   | Northern               | 45.9±14.2                      |
|            | Eastern                | 44.6±13.6                      |

- a ACIAR Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
- b SIMLESA Sustainable Intensification of Maize Legume cropping systems for food security in Eastern and Southern Africa

drudgery that characterizes many farming activities in ESA, a consequence of low farm mechanization, may result in household members, and particularly the youth exposed to alternative urban livelihoods, favouring non-farm over on-farm activities (Diao et al. 2012).

Thus, following the analysis above, we argue that farm power (both in quantity and quality) represents a major limiting factor to productivity in many farming systems of ESA. Supporting evidence exists to illustrate the link between farm power and farm productivity. In areas of low population density, farm production is often limited more by labour and draught power than by land (Baudron et al. 2012). For example, the quantity of cereals produced by farming households in

Table 2 Prevalence of HIV/AIDS and proportion of female-headed households in six countries of Eastern and Southern Africa (source: World Bank, 2011)

| Country    | Prevalence of HIV/AIDS (% of population ages 15 49) -   | Proportion of female-headed households (%)   |
|------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Ethiopia   | -                                                       | 22.8 (a)                                     |
| Kenya      | 6.3                                                     | 31.7 (b)                                     |
| Malawi     | 11                                                      | 24.7 (c)                                     |
| Mozambique | 11.5                                                    | 26.4 (b)                                     |
| Tanzania   | 5.6                                                     | 24.5 (a)                                     |
| Zimbabwe   | 14.3                                                    | 37.7 (d)                                     |

(a) data from 2005; (b) data from 2003; (c) data from 2004; and (d) data from 2006

Fig. 3 Income structure of farming households of different wealth categories in Northern Zimbabwe (source: Baudron 2011)

<!-- image -->

the Ethiopian Rift Valley increases with increasing numbers of draught animals owned by these households (Baudron et al. 2014; Fig. 4a). Farm production may be affected by power constraints in more subtle ways, including low nutrient input and delayed planting. Animal manure is often the main source of nutrients applied to fields in ESA. However, manure is a bulky material that requires labour and/or draught power for its transport and application (Tittonell et al. 2005). As most farming households experience constraints in their available farm power, they tend to apply most of the manure available to the fields closest to the homestead (Zingore et al. 2007; Fig. 4b). As a result of negative nutrient balances, fields further away may become degraded and unproductive (Tittonell and Giller 2013). Constraints in farm power may also result in delayed land preparation and delayed planting, which often result in severe yield penalties in ESA (Fig. 4c).

Evidently, agricultural production in ESA is unlikely to increase without addressing the issue of limited farm power

availability, particularly during labour peaks, which tend to be more pronounced for the poorer farming households (Fig. 4d). However, the emphasis of current agricultural research and development in the region is on seeds, nutrients and water (http://simlesa.cimmyt.org/; http://africa-rising.net/; http:// www.agra.org/), whilst farm power appears to be the ' forgotten resource . The lack of R&amp;D concern for farm ' power and mechanization in ESA can also been seen by the paucity of literature on the topic since the 1990s (Diao et al. 2012). In the past decades, departments of agricultural engineering in international universities and research organizations have also faced severe declines in resources, and even closure (Biggs et al. 2011).

Below, we propose a new approach to farm mechanization in ESA, which we argue is a necessary condition for food security in the region.

## Addressing the issue of declining farm power

## Increasing farm power supply through appropriate mechanization

Farm power constraints may be alleviated by increasing the power supply (i.e., agricultural mechanization) and/or by decreasing power demand (i.e., power-saving cropping systems).

Improved mechanization based on animal traction is probably the most viable option to increase the power supply in

Fig. 4 a Mean cereal production per farm in the Central Rift Valley of Ethiopia as a function of the number of pairs of oxen (source: Baudron et al. 2014); b annual N input from manure to plots as a function of their distance to the homestead and for different wealth categories in North-East Zimbabwe (source: Zingore et al. 2007); c cotton yield as a function of the planting date in Northern Zimbabwe (the dotted line represents the attainable yield, source: Baudron 2011); and d mean monthly allocation of labour for different farm types in Northern Zimbabwe (source: Baudron et al. 2012)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

many parts of ESA where draught animals represent the main source of power. During the 1970s and 1980s, numerous ' improved ' animal-drawn implements and harnesses were produced and promoted (Starkey 1989). However, except for few notable exceptions (such as the versatile, well-designed and effective animal-drawn machines invented and promoted by Jean Nolle; Nolle 1986), there have not been many examples of widespread adoption of these implements. More recently, animal-drawn reduced tillage implements have become a focus of research and development efforts on animal traction in the region (Johansen et al. 2012), as such implements allow for larger areas to be planted quickly while reducing power requirements. Although the procurement of such equipment remains dependent on imports (from e.g., Brazil) in many countries of the region, the growing interest surrounding it has also stimulated the local manufacturing sector in many cases (Sims et al. 2012). Chisel-tined rippers represent a type of animal-drawn reduced tillage equipment becoming increasingly popular in ESA. For example, several thousand units of the ' Magoye ripper ' -developed in Zambia in 1986 -have been produced and are being used in Zambia and neighbouring countries (Baudron et al. 2007).

However, although appropriate mechanization of animalbased traction has benefited a significant number of farmers in the region, it should be noted that draught animals are uncommon in large parts of SSA: the estimated 16 million oxen in the region are concentrated in few regions, including Ethiopia and Eritrea, Burkina Faso and Mali, the lake Victoria region and parts of Zimbabwe, Zambia and Malawi (Sims and Kienzle 2006). Elsewhere, diseases such as trypanosomiasis and tick-borne diseases (e.g., East Coast fever) restrict the presence of oxen. Even in regions where draught animals represent the main source of farm power, a decline in their numbers has occurred since the late 1990s -especially in Eastern and Southern Africa -because of the combined effect of diseases and recurring droughts (Mrema et al. 2008). In addition, in many parts of the region where communal grazing areas are shrinking and farm size is declining, feed shortages are becoming a major challenge to livestock keeping (Tegebu et al. 2011). Thus, it could be argued that for many farmers in the region, increasing farm power supply would require motorized solutions.

Based on the experiences of some Asian countries in which, similarly to ESA, smallholders dominate, three models could be used to deliver these motorized solutions in ESA (Diao et al. 2012). These models are typified by India (where medium to large scale farmers own medium-size machines and hire out their services to other farmers), China (where specialized enterprises migrate over large areas), and Bangladesh (where small-scale farmers own small machines and hire out their services to other farmers).

The Indian model is based on high public support in the form of subsidies -for the purchase of four-wheel tractors

(4WTs) and other machines -marketing regulations (such as minimum price guarantee), and large investment in infrastructure (Singh 2006; Hazell 2009). This level of public support is currently unlikely to occur in most of ESA due to fiscal limitations. Moreover, this model has resulted in large inequities, favouring medium- to large-scale farmers and leaving many of the small-scale farmers without access to mechanization (Biggs et al. 2011). These inequalities play out through large regional disparities, with Punjab and Haryana having the highest levels of mechanization and the Eastern states (e.g., Bihar, Orissa) the lowest (Singh 2006).

The Chinese model is based on migration of specialized equipment like combine harvesters and thus requires a high quality rural road network, which is absent in many ESA countries. Moreover, this model requires large ( subcontinen-' tal ) agroecological areas with rainfall gradients, whereas ESA ' is fragmented into relatively small farming regions and/or countries (Dixon et al. 2001).

The authors feel that the third model, the Bangladeshi model, is more applicable and could be adapted to large parts of ESA. This model may also describe mechanization processes in several South and Southeast Asia countries such as Thailand, Vietnam, and Sri Lanka. Bangladesh s agriculture, ' which relies on small machines such as two-wheel tractors (2WTs), is one of the most mechanized of South Asia, far more than India s agriculture, which relies on larger machines: ' ~80 % of the cropland of Bangladesh is prepared mechanically, against less than ~50 % in India (Kulkarni 2009; MTD 2013). Even though virtually all Bangladeshi farmers, even the poorest, have access to 2WTs, only about one in thirty farmers actually owns one (Justice and Biggs 2013). This means that nearly every 2WT owner is a service provider, and that the large majority of 2WT users gain access to mechanization by hiring service providers. This Bangladeshi model of mechanization appears equitable as even the poorest farmers have access to 2WT-based services, which are cheaper than services using animal traction or 4WTs (Alam 2003; Roy and Singh 2008). This is made possible by the low cost of 2WTs -making their purchase possible for many farmers without support from a formal financial institution -and the use of the 2WT for multiple purposes including transport, post-harvest operations and water pumping that leads to high annual rates of return on investment (Biggs et al. 2011; Diao et al. 2012).

This form of appropriate mechanization has been possible in Bangladesh thanks to the removal by the Government of duties, sales taxes and standardization restrictions on low horsepower diesel pumps and 2WTs in 1988 (Biggs et al. 2011). These policy changes stimulated the emergence of a private-sector led supply chain for mechanization, guaranteeing that the specifications and the prices of the machines imported matched local demand (Diao et al. 2012). The private sector, which is guided by profitability, is better equipped

than the public sector to understand this demand, and in particular the trade-offs that exist between machine quality and machine cost. Although Japanese and Korean 2WTs are of superior quality compared to Chinese 2WTs, their price is more than double. As a result of a demand for cheap and ' good enough ' 2WTs, the 2WT market in Bangladesh is largely dominated by Chinese 2WTs (Biggs et al. 2011).

## Decreasing power demand through power saving technologies

Land preparation is the most energy-demanding farming operation in rainfed agriculture (Lal 2004). Simplification of this operation -i.e., using reduced or no tillage -leads to a major reduction of power demand for farming. Although this depends on soil properties (e.g., texture, moisture), reduced or no tillage cuts energy requirements by about half compared to conventional land preparation, i.e., mouldboard or disc ploughing (Lal 2004). Thus, it could be argued that the elimination of soil inversion makes the use of low powered, affordable and easy to maintain 2WTs a viable option for rainfed agriculture. It is well recognized that 2WTs can only produce enough traction to plough wet paddy fields, but not dry soils in rainfed conditions (Holtkamp and Lorenz 1990; Singh 2006). Therefore, reduced or no tillage could make the use of 2WTs viable under rainfed conditions. Moreover, although 2WTs have a lower work rate than larger 4WTs, reduced or no tillage is faster compared to conventional tillage (0.76 vs. 1.37 h ha -1 according to Rego, 1998, cited by Sims and Kienzle 2006) and thus reduces this handicap, making 2WTs potentially more attractive for users and owners/service providers.

Reduced or no tillage in combination with surface mulching and crop rotation form the basis of conservation agriculture (CA) (Kassam et al. 2009). As stated above, CA may increase the viability of small-scale mechanization. The spread of appropriate mechanization may in turn increase the adoption of CA in ESA, which has so far been slow (Derpsch et al. 2010). Indeed, the lack of appropriate implements to seed at the right depth through an organic mulch and with minimum soil disturbance is recognized as one of the major constraints faced by African smallholders on adopting CA (Hobbs et al. 2008; Giller et al. 2009; Johansen et al. 2012). Delivering mechanized CA to smallholders in ESA (e.g., via service providers) may stimulate CA adoption, a technology that has the potential to maintain the productive capacity of soils (Chivenge et al. 2006) and in certain circumstances to increase productivity by allowing early planting (Haggblade and Tembo 2003) and by improving rainwater use efficiency (Rockström et al. 2009; Thierfelder and Wall 2009). Moreover, a shift from animal draught power to tractor power would release some crop residues from being used to feed draught animals: this biomass could be used to feed more productive animals (e.g., dairy cows, fat stock production)

but could also be used as surface mulch, representing another potential synergy between agricultural mechanization and CA. For example, Baudron et al. (2014) estimated that substituting mechanization for animal draught power would increase the proportion of farmers in the Ethiopian Rift Valley retaining at least 1 t ha -1 of crop residues in their fields from 3 to 25 %. Oxen represent a large proportion of the cattle owned by small-scale farmers in many parts of Eastern and Southern Africa (e.g., most of Ethiopia, central Mozambique, Northern Tanzania; Table 3). Estimating the live weight of oxen in Eastern and Southern Africa at 250 kg per head and estimating their daily ingestion at 2 % of their live weight, several tonnes of biomass are consumed every year by these animals (Table 3), although they may only provide a few weeks of work annually. Therefore, substituting 2WTs for oxen would release this biomass in many parts of ESA where animal traction is important, and this could be made available for surface mulch.

Tapping the above-synergies between small-scale mechanization and CA is made possible by the recent development of seeders and other implements from newly emergent industrial economies such as India, China and Brazil, which is the topic of the next section.

## Conservation agriculture and other farm operations using two-wheel tractors

## Conservation agriculture using a two-wheel tractor

Several CA seeders for 2WTs are now commercially available, from countries such as China, India and Brazil, and can be used to seed most large grain (e.g., maize, cotton) and small grain crops (e.g., wheat, rice). Based on the technologies used for seed placement, two broad categories of CA seeders can be distinguished: (1) rotary strip-tillage seeders, and (2) towbehind or toolbar-based seeders.

Rotary strip-tillage seeders are based on a modification of conventional rotary cultivators (Fig. 5a). They have low draught requirements, resulting in the possibility to use up to six openers with no need for extra weight to penetrate the ground (Justice et al. 2004; Baker 2007), but tend to disturb large volumes of soil, incorporate a high percentage of crop residues (making them no longer available as surface mulch), and cannot be used in rocky soils (Baker 2007). At least two companies manufacture rotary strip-tillage seeders on a commercial basis, one in China (www.chinalyjx.com/en) and one in India (www. nationalagroinds.com). Several more rotary strip-tillage seeders are in the development stage (Jin et al. 2014).

Tow-behind seeders are generally adapted from draught animal seeders (Fig. 5b), are usually one or two-row and use discs or tines, and are manufactured on a commercial basis by two Brazilian companies (www.fitarelli.com.br, www.knapik. com.br), two Indian companies (www.khedutagro.com,

Table 3 Mean proportion of oxen in the cattle herd of 14 areas targeted by the ACIAR -funded a SIMLESA b project in Eastern and Southern Africa, and estimated quantity of biomass consumed annually by oxen in each farm, estimating the live weight of one ox at 250 kg and its daily intake at 2 % of its live weight. Standard deviations are given after the signs ' ± . (source: SIMLESA, ' 2014; TLU: Tropical Livestock Unit)

| Country    | Area                   | Proportion of oxen in the herd (% TLU)   | Estimated quantity of biomass consumed by oxen (kg year - 1 farm - 1 )   |
|------------|------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ethiopia   | Pawe                   | 51.1±30.8 %                              | 2831±2570                                                                |
|            | Bako                   | 38.2±22.2 %                              | 3541±2909                                                                |
|            | Adami                  | 34.2±21.2 %                              | 4182±4314                                                                |
|            | Hawassa                | 31.2±25.7 %                              | 2424±3013                                                                |
| Kenya      | Western                | 10.3±24.7 %                              | 584±1770                                                                 |
|            | Eastern                | 0.2±2.9 %                                | 13±227                                                                   |
| Malawi     | Lilongwe-Ntcheu        | 1.3±10.0 %                               | 69±798                                                                   |
|            | Kasungu-Mchinji-Salima | 0.0±0.0 %                                | 0±0                                                                      |
|            | Balaka                 | 0.0±0.0 %                                | 0±0                                                                      |
| Mozambique | Manica                 | 22.4±27.3 %                              | 2428±5890                                                                |
|            | Tete                   | 3.3±11.7 %                               | 237±1176                                                                 |
|            | Sofala                 | 0.0±0.0 %                                | 0±0                                                                      |
| Tanzania   | Northern               | 14.5±24.4 %                              | 1962±4077                                                                |
|            | Eastern                | 6.9±20.6 %                               | 261±1486                                                                 |

- a ACIAR Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
- b SIMLESA Sustainable Intensification of Maize Legume cropping systems for food security in Eastern and Southern Africa

www.nationalagroinds.com), and one Kenyan company (www.ndumekenya.com). Others are in the development stage in Asia (Jin et al. 2014) and East Africa (Sims et al. 2012). Toolbar-based seeders use various discs or tines that can be mounted on the tool bars in different configurations: single-row, two-row, or multiple-row. At least one toolbarbased seeder -the ARC Gongli seed drill -is commercially available from China. Tow-behind and toolbar-based seeders

minimize soil disturbance and maximize the fraction of crop residue retained as surface mulch, but the small footprint and light weight of 2WTs translate into low tractive ability, limiting the number of tines that can be pulled in untilled conditions (to four or fewer tines in hard soils).

Therefore, rotary strip-tillage seeders, tow-behind and toolbar-based seeders all present advantages and drawbacks. The choice of a particular seeder is thus site-specific, and

Fig. 5 a Strip-tillage using a modified Chinese seed drill from Danyang Liangyou Machinery Co. Ltd. (www.chinalyjx.com/), b direct seeding using a Brazilian seeder from Fitarelli Máquinas Agrícolas (www.fitarelli.com.br), c two-wheel tractor being used for transport in Northern Tanzania, and d two-wheel tractor shelling maize using a locallymanufactured sheller, in Northern Tanzania

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

depends on factors such as soil type, soil moisture content at the time of seeding, amount of residues retained as surface mulch, etc. Although the number of CA seeders commercially available is small, the number of models in prototype development stages exceeds 20, with more coming onto the development scene every year.

## Transport, post-harvest operations, and irrigation

As mentioned above, the use of 2WTs for multiple purposes including transport, post-harvest operations and water pumping, is a main factor explaining the profitability and spread of 2WTs in Bangladesh (and elsewhere in South and Southeast Asia). Simple equipment including trailers, threshers, and water pumps can be easily procured and even produced locally (Diao et al. 2012; Fig. 5c and d). Moreover, these operations are not time-bound, or synchronic, and are thus well suited for the development of the rental market (Binswanger 1984; see section below on Ensuring the viability of private sector business models).

Transport is often one of the first uses of new mobile power sources, once they are made available (Binswanger 1984). Transport is a major force shaping farming systems, by connecting farming communities to other centres of demand (Binswanger and Pingali 1988; Tiffen 2003). As pointed out by Godfray et al. (2010), poor transport may negatively affect agricultural productivity: (1) by raising the farm-gate cost of inputs (such as fertilizer), leading to low input use; (2) by raising the cost of moving commodities to the market, leading to farmers choosing not to improve agricultural productivity because of poor returns; and (3) by leading to high losses of commodities (particularly perishable ones) before they reach the market. The so-called ' first mile ' (i.e., the distance from the farm to the collection point) often represents a small fraction of the total logistic chain (from the farm to the final market) but a high proportion of the total cost of transporting agricultural commodities from the farm to market in ESA. For example, the first mile only represents 0.4 to 10 % of the logistic chain length, but 20 to 37 % of the transport cost, for high value agricultural commodities (e.g., french beans, bananas, potatoes) in Kenya (KENDAT and IFRTD 2013). The transport cost of the first mile can be reduced by using appropriate ' Intermediate Means of Transport ' (IMT), which are defined as transport means with a carrying capacity below 1,000 kg used for short distances, typically below 20 km (i.e., they are intermediate between human portage and large-scale transport means; Starkey 2000). Trailers pulled by 2WTs are part of the wide basket of IMTs (Fig. 5c). The cost of transport per unit of volume and unit of distance varies with the demand level and the transport distance: although the transport cost with a 2WT may be higher than with an ox cart for a distance of 10 km (regardless of the annual demand for transport), it

may be lower for a distance of 50 km with any annual demand for transport exceeding 30 tonnes (Starkey 2002).

Once new sources of power become available, they are also commonly used for selected operations that are powerintensive and either (1) require little human control, which is typical of post-harvest operations such as shelling (Fig. 5d), threshing and milling, or (2) are unprofitable when un-mechanized, which is typical of water pumping (Binswanger 1984). Even at low labour wages, mechanizing these operations is often profitable (Binswanger 1984). In addition, the combination of small-scale irrigation with small-scale mechanization could have synergistic effects. First, mechanization schemes in SSA have mainly been successful when coupled with irrigation (Mrema et al. 2008). Second, the collapse of large staterun irrigation schemes across Africa has brought a new paradigm centred on small-scale irrigation (Kay 2001), creating opportunities for pump sets powered by 2WTs to be used in small-scale irrigation. Third, the use of low horsepower engines for water pumping may precede (and stimulate) their use for other agricultural operations, as was the case in South and Southeast Asia (Biggs 2012).

## Ensuring the viability of private sector business models

The collapse of virtually all the government-run tractor schemes -which were popular up to the 1990s in most of SSA -demonstrates the need for a new approach to mechanization that involves the private sector. It is commonly understood that through the development of market systems, replication, dissemination and uptake of new technologies are most likely to occur (Magistro et al. 2007). However, in many local situations, weaknesses in technology market systems can be found that inhibit the uptake of new and innovative agricultural technologies by smallholder farmers. In recent years the interdependence of the private sector and its client base has been highlighted through the concept of ' creating shared value ' (Porter and Kramer 2011) and efforts are being made to understand how technologies and business models can be developed simultaneously to cater for the demand from the large consumer base of smallholder farmers (London and Hart 2010).

The experience of International Development Enterprises (iDE) in Bangladesh has demonstrated the possibility of harnessing the power of the market to drive technology adoption among the rural poor, by involving the private sector in the development and promotion of agricultural technologies (Magistro et al. 2007). Similarly, a market-oriented approach to business development may be used in ESA to foster the adoption of 2WTs and their ancillary equipment. This approach could be guided by the lessons learned from previous experiences in market development, which can be distilled into a set of six principles: (1) facilitating the emergence of private rural

service providers; (2) considering the need for a broker; (3) linking mechanization and other input business models to output business models; (4) broadening the range of services offered; (5) bundling hiring services; and (6) providing kick-start subsidies for private sector investment in mechanization service provision. These principles will be elaborated below.

In ESA, smallholders are capital constrained and may not be in a position to purchase 2WTs individually. Alternative forms of service provision need to be examined with mechanization services provided either through independent service providers or through group ownership of mechanization assets (Landers 2000; Sims et al. 2011; Wongtschowski et al. 2013). Service hiring is not new to ESA, as many farmers currently hire labour and/or draught power (Table 4). Service business models could be driven by private sector dealers and manufacturers linking up to service providers and operators at the local level. However, the private sector may be reluctant to invest in mechanization in areas where agricultural markets are weak, awareness and demand for machinery and their services are absent and farmers are vulnerable to shocks and stresses. Under these circumstances, intermediaries -such as NGOs, government or donor-supported projects -may be needed to facilitate linkages between the private sector and smallholder farmers and thus develop viable business models (Kahan 2007; London and Hart 2010). Once demand can be assured, intermediaries would be expected to ' exit , allowing ' the private sector to step in and scale-out the technologies. Increasing attention is being paid to identifying such ' scalability ' from the outset when designing interventions in market systems (Cooley and Kohl 2006). In contrast, where markets

are stronger with better rewards for investment, the private sector is more likely to emerge as the initial and main driver of the chain, omitting the need for intermediaries.

The existence of market-oriented farm enterprises and their associated cash flow is a prerequisite to affording either investment in, or rental of farm machinery (Mrema et al. 2008). It is thus crucial to recognize the inter-linkage between input markets (including mechanization) and output markets (Lundy et al. 2012), with smallholders lying at the interface of the two. The viability of a mechanization service provision business also depends on mechanization use rates, which can be greatly extended by considering off-farm services such as transport and potential use such as the maintenance of rural road networks (Petts 2012). This allows 2WTs to be in productive use for a greater part of the year and to reduce the unit cost of custom work. The cost of a unit (service or product) may also be reduced through ' bundling ' mechanization services with complementary packages of inputs and materials, assistance in marketing produce, financial services and general advisory service support. A form of bundling, which is likely to appeal to customers, is the integrated provision services through support centres that offer a range of goods and services as a ' one-stop shop ' where constraints can be addressed in an orchestrated manner (Downing 2001; Sims et al. 2011). In areas where markets are weak, and where smallholders face difficulties in paying for knowledge-based support services (e.g., information, training, advisory services), these services may be ' embedded ' in a commercial transaction in order for them to be affordable to smallholders (Tanburn 2002; Hitchins et al. 2005; Kahan 2007, 2011).

Table 4 Proportion of rural households hiring labour, hiring oxen and owning a motorbike in 14 areas targeted by the ACIAR a funded SIMLESA b project in Eastern and Southern Africa (source: SIMLESA, 2014)

| Country    | Area                   | Proportion of households hiring labour (%)   | Proportion of households hiring oxen (%)   | Proportion of households owning a motorbike (%)   |
|------------|------------------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Ethiopia   | Pawe                   | 53 %                                         | 8 %                                        | 0 %                                               |
|            | Bako                   | 26 %                                         | 13 %                                       | 0 %                                               |
|            | Adami                  | 51 %                                         | 14 %                                       | 1 %                                               |
|            | Hawassa                | 40 %                                         | 7 %                                        | 1 %                                               |
| Kenya      | Western                | 56 %                                         | 51 %                                       | 6 %                                               |
|            | Eastern                | 74 %                                         | 12 %                                       | 5 %                                               |
| Malawi     | Lilongwe-Ntcheu        | 8 %                                          | 10 %                                       | 1 %                                               |
| Malawi     | Kasungu-Mchinji-Salima | 21 %                                         | 19 %                                       | 1 %                                               |
|            | Balaka                 | 11 %                                         | 3 %                                        | 0 %                                               |
| Mozambique | Manica                 | 35 %                                         | 28 %                                       | 7 %                                               |
|            | Tete                   | 43 %                                         | 20 %                                       | 8 %                                               |
|            | Sofala                 | 41 %                                         | 0 %                                        | 1 %                                               |
| Tanzania   | Northern               | 48 %                                         | 51 %                                       | 3 %                                               |
|            | Eastern                | 51 %                                         | 22 %                                       | 3 %                                               |

In weak, risky and distorted markets where the private sector is reluctant to invest, public sector support may be needed to ' kick-start ' development. Subsidies may create awareness of the new technologies and develop the market, but a time limit would need to be set for phasing subsidies out (Tanburn 2002; Gibson 2001; Downing 2001; Meyer-Stammer 2006; Kahan 2007; DFID and SDC 2008). The challenge is how best to design ' smart ' subsidies in a way that develops rather than distorts the market for mechanization services.

## Likely social and environmental impact

## Mechanization without consolidation and labour displacement

African agriculture is dominated by small farms, with 2/3 of all farms smaller than 2 ha (Altieri 2009). These small farms sustain the livelihoods of millions and are the backbone of local food systems (Rosset 2008). However, the viability of small farms is increasingly questioned where there are no options to specialize in the production of high value commodities or to diversify into non-farm sources of income (Hazell 2005). Elsewhere, small farm size may be a major constraint to agricultural intensification and may maintain smallholders in poverty traps (Harris and Orr 2014). Therefore, the need to increase national food production in the region (see Section Decreasing power demand through power saving technologies) may call for some level of land consolidation. In larger farms, larger machines able to complete operations quickly and efficiently can be used. Historically, mechanization and consolidation have often occurred in parallel. However, we argue that mechanization should not be a cause of consolidation. Because of the misguided assumption that large-scale mechanization is the only viable form, mechanization programmes in SSA have often led to consolidation, and the disappearance of small farms that were otherwise prosperous (Mrema et al. 2008). In the process, smallholders and hired labour were often displaced (Binswanger et al. 1995; Brown et al. 2004). Very diverse patterns of mechanization have taken place in Asia, and the case of Bangladesh, for example, illustrates vividly the fact that mechanization can take place without land consolidation (Biggs et al. 2011). The capital needed for the purchase, operation and maintenance of a 2WT is much lower than for a 4WT (Diao et al. 2012). As a result, mechanization models based on 2WTs tend to promote equitable access to mechanization: in Bangladesh, virtually all farmers, even the poorest, have access to mechanization services (Alam 2003). In addition, a 2WT can get access to and operate efficiently in much smaller fields than a ' conventional 4WT ' (i.e., excluding mini-tractors of 25 hp or less, these being of similar size to 2WTs, but more sophisticated and therefore more expensive). In fields that are smaller than 0.1 ha,

2WTs have a higher field efficiency than ' conventional 4WTs , ' which can spend more than half their time simply lifting the implement, turning and positioning for the next run in fields of this size. Therefore, although some authors (e.g., Mrema et al. 2008) have argued that land consolidation -to optimize the field efficiency of 4WTs and their ancillary equipment -may be more desirable than adapting mechanization to the needs of small farms, we argue here for the opposite. Consolidation should be driven by economic development (in particular by labour cost), not by mechanization itself.

In addition, the mechanization model proposed here, where farmers access mechanical services through service providers (see Section Conservation agriculture and other farm operations using two-wheel tractors), is unlikely to result in labour displacement. Only the most power-intensive operations (e.g., primary soil tillage, post-harvest operations) are likely to be mechanized. Other operations, which are unlikely to be mechanized until labour wages increase (e.g., weeding, harvesting), will continue to be performed through (family and hired) labour. Therefore, 2WTs are likely to be a complement to, not a substitute for, human labour.

## Mechanization without soil degradation and biodiversity loss

A 2WT is lighter in weight than a 4WT and so exerts less ground pressure and results in less soil compaction. In addition, the use of 2WTs in rainfed conditions implies that they are used for minimum tillage (see Section Decreasing power demand through power saving technologies) as they are not powerful enough to plough for most soil types (Holtkamp and Lorenz 1990; Singh 2006). Therefore, the use of 2WTs can be considered a form of mechanization that potentially reduces soil degradation, a negative effect of mechanization often witnessed in the tropics (Lal 1985) and elsewhere.

A shift from draught animal power to tractor power could result in more crop residue being retained in the field (Section Decreasing power demand through power saving technologies) rather than used as feed. This would result in an increased input of carbon to the soil, leading to maintained or improved soil fertility. Indeed, crop residues represent the main organic input available to SSA farmers (Lal 2005). Animal manure may be an important source of carbon in some farming systems, but its application to fields distant from the homestead is generally limited (Zingore et al. 2007; Fig. 4b).

Maintaining landscape heterogeneity is key to conserving agricultural biodiversity (Fischer et al. 2006). Land consolidation leads to a loss of spatial heterogeneity (e.g., hedgerows) and temporal heterogeneity (as a large area is under the same management regime at any given time) (Benton et al. 2003). Therefore, by allowing the maintenance of a mosaic of small fragmented fields, 2WT-based mechanization may be favourable to biodiversity. In addition, the 2WT s narrower '

Fig. 6 a Imports of two-wheel tractors from 2000 to 2007 (source: FAOSTAT, 2012), and b road sector energy consumption (source: World Bank, 2011) in six countries of Eastern and Southern Africa

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7 a Small engines, such as those fitted to motorbikes and waterpumps, have become ubiquitous in rural Kenya, and b even the most remote village in Zimbabwe is equipped with grinding mill powered by a diesel engine (picture taken in Masoka, Mbire District)

<!-- image -->

track (1.1 m wheel base, i.e., far narrower than the track of a ' conventional 4WT ) means it can operate in fields where ' scattered trees, key ecological structures for agricultural biodiversity and a number of ecosystem services (Manning et al. 2006), are retained.

From an environmental perspective however, the promotion of fossil-fuel based options could be perceived as controversial, given the fact that 75 % of all anthropogenic greenhouse gases emissions globally are the result of fossil fuel combustion (Woods et al. 2010). However, it should be noted that agriculture accounts for only 2 -3 % of global (largely fossil-fuel based) energy consumption, and that this share is declining (Woods et al. 2010). Moreover, most of the energy consumed by agriculture globally is represented by the manufacturing and provision of agricultural inputs, while direct field energy (i.e., consumption by farm machinery) is relatively small (Woods et al. 2010). Finally, the energy used per agricultural land area in ESA is negligible compared to industrial countries such as those of Europe (www.na.unep. net). Therefore, while the issue of climate change mitigation calls for maximizing energy use efficiency in agriculture globally, this should translate into different approaches in different regions. Technologies that reduce energy demand while maintaining production levels should be deployed in European agriculture. In contrast, ESA agriculture may require technologies that increase energy demand, but given the fact that farm power appears to be a major limiting factor on productivity in many farming systems of ESA (see Section Increasing food production in SSA will require an

increase in available farm power), the increase in production resulting from these technologies is expected to be disproportionately high compared to the increase in fossil fuel consumption i.e., high energy use efficiency.

## Conclusions: why would appropriate mechanization work this time?

Although fairly uncommon in ESA a decade ago, 2WTs are becoming more available in the region, as the number of units imported has increased in several countries, and in particular Tanzania (Fig. 6a). As of 2014, the number of units in use in that country was around 6,000. More recently, Ethiopia has also started importing 2WTs in large numbers, with the number of units in use in the country estimated at 4,100 in 2014. The lack of demand for mechanization and the lack of supporting infrastructure were major reasons for the failure of past initiatives promoting mechanization. As agriculture in ESA has become more intensive and more commercially oriented (Fig. 1d), we are confident that this demand has increased. Both urban and rural transportation have expanded at a fast rate, as illustrated for example by the fuel consumption for road transport, which more than doubled in Ethiopia and Tanzania between 2000 and 2009 (Fig. 6b). This growth has been paralleled by an increase in the capacity to service and repair motorized vehicles and an increase in the availability of fuel and lubricants that could benefit 2WT market systems. Small engines, in the form of motorcycles and auto-rickshaws,

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

have literally boomed in many ESA countries. But small engines are not only common in urban areas and in the transport sector: they have also spread in rural areas and are commonly used for post-harvest operations and water pumping (Fig. 7). In summary, the environment in rural Africa has changed tremendously and appears now suitable for appropriate mechanization.

The approach used by the past initiatives may have also been inappropriate, with a focus on large machines not suitable for small and fragmented fields, and/or too costly for many African smallholders and private sector hire-service providers, and a reliance on the public sector that led to inefficient and uneconomic government-run tractor hire schemes. We argue that appropriate and equitable mechanization may be achieved by using 2WTs (which do not have the tractive ability to plough under rainfed conditions with most soils but are suited to CA) and involving the private sector through business model development.

This approach should target priority areas where (1) the supporting infrastructure mentioned above (e.g., repair services) is the most developed, (2) fuel is available and affordable, (3) agriculture is relatively commercially-oriented (i.e., there is a demand pull for mechanization), (4) agriculture is constrained by labour shortages, at least seasonally, (5) holdings are small and fragmented and there is relief in the landscape (2WT-based mechanization is likely to outcompete 4WT-based mechanization in such areas), (6) maintaining draught animals is expensive (e.g., feed shortage), and (7) soils are relatively deep and stone-free. This, we argue, defines the ' niche ' for the form of mechanization advocated here. Early efforts with the promotion of this approach in the region (www.facasi.actafrica.org) also suggest that the following sequence should be followed: (1) identifying tasks to be mechanized (low labour productivity, high labour drudgery, willingness to hire services to perform these tasks), (2) identifying and/or manufacturing suitable machines and adapting them if necessary, (3) creating demand (incentives for commercial actors) through aggressive demonstration, and (4) supporting the multiple markets around 2WT-based mechanization through market linkages, promotion, capacity-building, and access to finance.

Acknowledgments This research was funded by AIFSRC (Australian International Food Security Research Centre) through the project ' Farm Power and Conservation Agriculture for Sustainable Intensification ' (FACASI, www.facasi.act-africa.org), by USAID (United States Agency for International Development) through the project ' Africa Research in Sustainable Intensification for the Next Generation ' (Africa RISING, www.africa-rising.net) and by MAIZE CRP (www.maize.org).

## References

Abbott, P., &amp; de Battisti, A. B. (2011). Recent global food price shocks: causes, consequences and lessons for African governments and donors. Journal of African Economies, 20 , i12 -i62.

Alam, G. M. M. (2003). Backward and Forward Linkages of Power Tiller Technology in an Area of Bangladesh. M.S. thesis. Dept. of Agricultural Economics, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh.

Altieri, M. A. (2009). Agroecology, small farms, and food sovereignty. Monthly Review, 61 , 102 113. -

Baker, C. J. (2007). Seeding Opener and Slot Shape. In C. J. Baker, K. E. Saxton, W. R. Ritchie, W. C. T. Chamen, D. C. Reicosky, M. F. S. Ribeiro, S. E. Justice, &amp; P. R. Hobbs (Eds.), No-tillage Seeding in Conservation Agriculture Second Edition . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Baudron, F. (2011). Agricultural intensification -saving space for wildlife? PhD thesis. Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands.

Baudron, F., Mwanza, H. M., Triomphe, B., &amp; Bwalya, M. (2007). Conservation agriculture in Zambia: a case study of southern province, Nairobi . Rome: African Conservation Tillage Network, Centre de Coopération Internationale de Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement, Montpeillier, France; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Baudron, F., Andersson, J. A., Corbeels, M., &amp; Giller, K. E. (2012). Failing to yield? Ploughs, conservation agriculture and the problem of agricultural intensification. An example from the Zambezi Valley, Zimbabwe. Journal of Development Studies, 48 , 393 412. -

Baudron, F., Jaleta, M., Okitoi, O., &amp; Tegegn, A. (2014). Conservation agriculture in African mixed crop-livestock systems: expanding the niche. Agriculture, Ecosystems &amp; Environment, 187 , 171 182. -

Benton, T. G., Vickery, J. A., &amp; Wilson, J. D. (2003). Farmland biodiversity: is habitat heterogeneity the key? Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution, 18 , 182 188. -

Berazneva, J., &amp; Lee, D. R. (2013). Explaining the African food riots of 2007 2008: an empirical analysis. -Food Policy, 39 , 28 39. -

Biggs, D. (2012). Small machines in the garden: everyday technology and revolution in the Mekong delta. Modern Asian Studies, 46 , 47 70. -

Biggs, S., Justice, S., &amp; Lewis, D. (2011). Patterns of Rural Mechanisation, Energy and Employment in South Asia: Reopening the Debate in Economic and Political Weekly. Vol. XLVI No 9. Mumbai, India.

Binswanger, H. (1984). Agricultural mechanization. A comparative historical perspective (World Bank Staff Working Papers Number 673). Washington DC: The World Bank.

Binswanger, H., &amp; Pingali, P. (1988). Technological priorities for farming in sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank Research Observer, 3 , 81 98. -

Binswanger, H. P., Deininger, K., &amp; Feder, G. (1995). Power, distortions, revolt and reform in agricultural land relations. Handbook of Development Economics, 3 , 2659 2772. -

Brown, J. C., Jepson, W., &amp; Price, K. P. (2004). Expansion of mechanized agriculture and land-cover change in southern Rondônia, Brazil. Journal of Latin American Geography, 3 , 96 102. -

Chivenge, P. P., Murwira, H. K., Giller, K. E., Mapfumo, P., &amp; Six, J. (2006). Long-term impact of reduced tillage and residue management on soil carbon stabilization: implications for conservation agriculture on contrasting soils. Soil &amp; Tillage Research, 94 , 328 -337.

Clarke, L., &amp; Bishop, C. (2002). Farm Power - Present and Future Availability in Developing Countries. Agricultural Engineering International: the CIGR Journal of Scientific Research and Development. Invited Overview Paper. Presented at the Special Session on Agricultural Engineering and International Development in the Third Millennium. ASAE Annual International Meeting/CIGR World Congress, July 30, 2002, Chicago, IL, USA. Vol. IV.

Cooley, L., &amp; Kohl, R. (2006). Scaling Up- From Vision to Large Scale Change: A Management Framework for Practitioners . Washington DC: Management Systems International.

Derpsch, R., Friedrich, T., Kassam, A., &amp; Li, H. (2010). Current status of adoption of no-till farming in the world and some of its main

benefits. International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, 3 , 1 25. -

DFID, SDC. (2008). A synthesis of the making markets work for the poor (M4P) approach. Department for International Development, London, UK, and Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, Berne, Germany.

Diao, X., Cossar, F., Houssou, N., Kolavalli, S., Jimah, K., &amp; Aboagye, P. (2012). Mechanization in Ghana. Searching for Sustainable Service Supply Models (IFPRI Discussion Paper). Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Dixon, J. A., Gibbon, D. P., &amp; Gulliver, A. (2001). Farming systems and poverty: improving farmers ' livelihoods in a changing world . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Downing, J. (2001). Introduction: business services for small enterprises in Asia. In J. Levitsky (Ed.), Small Business Services in Asian Countries . Rugby: Intermediate Technology Development Group.

FAO-Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations. (2009). The State of Food Insecurity in the World. Economic crises -impacts and lessons learned . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Fischer, J., Lindenmayer, D. B., &amp; Mannin, A. D. (2006). Biodiversity, ecosystem function, and resilience: ten guiding principles for commodity production landscapes. Frontiers in Ecology and Environment, 4 , 80 86. -

Gibson, A. (2001). The development of markets for business development services in Asia. In J. Levitsky (Ed.), Small Business Services in Asian Countries . Rugby: Intermediate Technology Development Group.

Giller, K. E., Witter, E., Corbeels, M., &amp; Tittonell, P. (2009). Conservation agriculture and smallholder farming in Africa: the heretics ' view. Field Crops Research, 114 , 23 34. -

Godfray, H. C. J., Beddington, J. R., Crute, I. R., Haddad, L., Lawrence, D., Muir, J. F., Pretty, J., Robinson, S., Thomas, S. M., &amp; Toulmin, C. (2010). Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 billion people. Science, 327 , 812 818. -

Haggblade, S., &amp; Tembo, G. (2003). Conservation farming in Zambia . Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Harris, D., &amp; Orr, A. (2014). Is rainfed agriculture really a pathway from poverty? Agricultural Systems, 123 , 84 96. -

Hazell, P. (2009). The Asian Green Revolution (IFPRI Discussion Paper 00911). Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Hazell, P. B. (2005). Is there a future for small farms? Agricultural Economics, 32 , 93 101. -

Hitchins, R., Elliott, D., &amp; Gibson, A. (2005). Making business service markets work for the rural poor -a review of experience. Small Enterprise Development, 16 , 10 23. -

Hobbs, P. R., Sayre, K., &amp; Gupta, R. (2008). The role of conservation agriculture in sustainable agriculture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363 , 543 555. -

Holtkamp, R., &amp; Lorenz, J. (1990). Small four-wheel tractors for the tropics and subtropics. Their role in agriculture and industrial development. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Ede, the Neterlands; Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit, Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany.

Jin, H., Zhiqiang, Z., Hongwen, L., &amp; Qingjie, W. (2014). Development of small/medium size no-till and minimum-till seeders in Asia: a review. International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, 7 , 1 12. -

Johansen, C., Haque, M. E., Bell, R. W., Thierfelder, C., &amp; Esdaile, R. J. (2012). Conservation agriculture for small holder rainfed farming: opportunities and constraints of new mechanized seeding systems. Field Crops Research, 132 , 18 32. -

Justice, S., &amp; Biggs, S. (2013). Diverse Patterns of Rural and Agricultural Mechanisation in Bangladesh and Nepal: Status and Emerging Themes. In J. Kienzle, J. E. Ashburner, &amp; B. G. Sims (Eds.), Mechanization for Rural Development: A review of patterns and

progress from around the world . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Justice, S., Haque, E., Meisner, C. A., Hossain, I., Sah, G., Tripathi, J., Rashid, M. H., &amp; Amin, M.R. (2004). Giving South Asia farmers a choice: a single drill for reduced and strip till crops for 2-wheel tractors. In Proc. Int. Conf. Beijing Sponsored by CIGR, CSAM and CASE Beijing, China, 11 -14 October 2014.

Kahan, D. G. (2007). Business services in support of farm enterprise development: a review of relevant experiences (Vol. 18). Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Kahan, D. (2011). Market-oriented advisory services in Asia -a review and lessons learned (RAP Publication 2011/10). Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Kassam, A., Friedrich, T., Shaxson, F., &amp; Pretty, J. (2009). The spread of Conservation Agriculture: justification, sustainability and uptake. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 7 , 292 320. -

Kay, M. (2001). Smallholder irrigation technology: prospects for sub-Saharan Africa . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

KENDAT, IFRTD (Eds.). (2013). Rural Logistics for Smallholder Farmers to Meet New Agricultural Market Demands. A Planning Framework for Improving the Efficiency of Transport Services in the High Value Agricultural Sub-Sector, Replicable in Other Values Chains. Kenya Network for Dissemination of Agricultural Technologies, International Forum for Rural Transport and Development, Nairobi, Kenya.

Kulkarni, S. (2009). Mechanization Of Agriculture - Indian Scenario. 5th APCAEM TC Meeting &amp; Expert Group Meeting on Application of Agricultural Machinery for Sustainable Agriculture, the Philippines, 14 16 October 2009. -

Lal, R. (1985). Mechanized tillage systems effects on properties of a tropical Alfisol in watersheds cropped to maize. Soil and Tillage Research, 6 , 149 161. -

Lal, R. (2004). Carbon emission from farm operations. Environment International, 30 , 981 990. -

Lal, R. (2005). World crop residues production and implications of its use as a biofuel. Environment International, 31 , 575 584. -

Landers, A. (2000). Farm machinery: selection, investment and management . London: Farming Press, United Business Media.

London, T., &amp; Hart, S. (2010). Next Generation Business Strategies for the Base of the Pyramid: New Approaches for Building Mutual Value . New Jersey: FT Press.

Lundy, M., Becx, G., Zamierowski, N., Amrein, A., Hurtado, J. J., Mosquera, E. E., &amp; Rodríguez, F. (2012). LINK methodology: A participatory guide to business models that link smallholders to markets CIAT Publication No. 380 . Cali: Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical.

Magistro, J., Roberts, M., Haggblade, S., Kramer, F., Polak, P., Weight, E., &amp; Yoder, R. (2007). A model for pro-poor wealth creation through small-plot irrigation and market linkages. Irrigation and Drainage, 56 , 321 334. -

Manning, A. D., Fischer, J., &amp; Lindenmayer, D. B. (2006). Scattered trees are keystone structures -implications for conservation. Biological Conservation, 132 , 311 321. -

Meyer-Stammer, J. (2006). Making market systems work? For the poor? Small Enterprise Development, 17 , 21 32. -

Minot, N. (2011). Transmission of world food price changes to markets in Sub-Saharan Africa. IFPRI, 34. Washington DC, USA.

Mrema, G. C., Baker, D., &amp; Kahan, D. (2008). Agricultural mechanization in Sub-Saharan Africa: Time for a new look (Agricultural Management, Marketing and Finance Occasional Paper 22). Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Nolle, J. (1986). Machines modernes a traction animale: Itinéraire d un ' inventeur au service des petites paysans . Paris: L Harmattan. '

Petts, R. (2012). Handbook of intermediate equipment for road works in emerging economies . Surrey: Intech Associates.

- Popkin, B. M., &amp; Bisgrove, E. Z. (1988). Urbanization and nutrition in low-income countries. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 10 , 3 23. -

Porter, M., &amp; Kramer, M. (2011). The Big Idea: Created Shared Valuehow to reinvent capitalism-and unleash a wave of innovation and growth. Harvard Business Review, January-February 2011.

Rockström, J., Kaumbutho, P., Mwalley, J., Nzabi, A. W., Temesgen, M., Mawenya, L., Barron, J., Mutua, J., &amp; Damgaard-Larsen, S. (2009). Conservation farming strategies in East and Southern Africa: yields and rain water productivity from on-farm action research. Soil &amp; Tillage Research, 103 , 23 32. -

Rosset, P. (2008). Food sovereignty and the contemporary food crisis. Development, 51 , 460 463. -

Roy, K. C., &amp; Singh, G. (2008). Agricultural mechanization in Bangladesh. AMA, Agricultural Mechanization in Asia, Africa &amp; Latin America, 39 , 83 93. -

Sims, B., &amp; Kienzle, J. (2006). Farm power and mechanization for small farms in sub-Saharan Africa . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Sims, B., Röttger, A., &amp; Mkomwa, S. (2011). Hire Services by Farmers for Farmers, Diversification Booklet 19 . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Sims, B. G., Thierfelder, C., Kienzle, J., Friedrich, T., &amp; Kassam, A. (2012). Development of the conservation agriculture equipment industry in sub-Saharan Africa. Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 28 , 813 823. -

Singh, G. (2006). Agricultural machinery industry in India (Manufacturing, marketing and mechanization promotion) (Status of Farm Mechanization in India). Delhi: Indian Agricultural Research Institute.

Starkey, P. (2000). Local transport solutions: people, paradoxes and progress. Lessons arising from the spread of intermediate means of transport . Washington DC: Rural Travel and Transport Program, The World Bank.

Starkey, P. (Ed.). (1989). Harnessing and implements for animal traction . Eschborn, Germany: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit.

Starkey, P. (Ed.). (2002). Improving rural mobility: options for developing motorized and nonmotorized transport in rural areas (World Bank Publications, V ol. 23). Washington DC: The World Bank.

Tanburn, J. (2002). Developing commercial markets for business development services - highlights of the Turin seminar, September 2001. Small Enterprise Development, 13 , 58 64. -

MTD - Mechanization and Technology Division (2013). Farm Mechanization in India: Presentation On Farm Mechanization Before Parliamentary Consultative Committee. (Indian) Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, January 2013.MTD - Mechanization and Technology Division (2013). Farm Mechanization in India: Presentation On Farm Mechanization Before Parliamentary Consultative Committee. (Indian) Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, January 2013.

Tegebu, F. N., Mathijs, E., Deckers, J., Haile, M., Nyssen, J., &amp; Tollens, E. (2011). Rural livestock asset portfolio in northern Ethiopia: a microeconomic analysis of choise and accumulation. Tropical Animal Health Production, 44 , 133 144. -

Thierfelder, C., &amp; Wall, P. C. (2009). Effects of conservation agriculture techniques on infiltration and soil water content in Zambia and Zimbabwe. Soil &amp; Tillage Research, 105 , 217 227. -

Tiffen, M. (2003). Transition in sub-Saharan Africa: agriculture, urbanization and income growth. World Development, 31 , 1343 1366. -

Tittonell, P ., &amp; Giller, K. E. (2013). When yield gaps are poverty traps: the paradigm of ecological intensification in African smallholder agriculture. Field Crops Research, 143 , 76 90. -

Tittonell, P., V anlauwe, B., Leffelaar, P. A., Shepherd, K. D., &amp; Giller, K. E. (2005). Exploring diversity in soil fertility management of smallholder farms in western Kenya: II Within-farm variability in resource allocation, nutrient flows and soil fertility status. Agriculture Ecosystem &amp; Environment, 110 , 166 184. -

Wongtschowski, M., Belt, J., Heemskerk, W., &amp; Kahan, K. (Eds). (2013). The business of agricultural business services: Working with smallholders in Africa. Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome; and AgriProFocus, Arnhem, the Netherlands.

Woods, J., Williams, A., Hughes, J. K., Black, M., &amp; Murphy, R. (2010). Energy and the food system. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, B: Biological Sciences, 365 , 2991 3006. -

Zingore, S., Murwira, H. K., Delve, R. J., &amp; Giller, K. E. (2007). Influence of nutrient management strategies on variability of soil fertility, crop yields and nutrient balances on smallholder farms in Zimbabwe. Agriculture, Ecosystems &amp; Environment, 119 , 112 -126.

<!-- image -->

Frédéric Baudron is a senior scientist working for the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT) based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Trained as a tropical agronomist, he specialized as a livestock scientist and started his carrier working for various development programs targeting the interface between people (mainly farmers) and wildlife. He then took his PhD on plant production systems. His research interests include farming system research, sustain-

able intensification, impact of agriculture on biodiversity, and participatory innovation development. He leads a number of projects, including the Farm Mechanization and Conservation Agriculture for Sustainable Intensification (FACASI) project, which is implemented in Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and Zimbabwe.

<!-- image -->

Brian Sims is an independent consultant working in tropical agriculture and agricultural engineering. His focus is on the development of small holder farmingsystems with an emphasis on farm mechanisation. He was leader of the International Development Group at Silsoe Research Institute (SRI) in the UK where he was involved in on-farm research and also advised on the identification, management and evaluation of agricultural development programmes. Since leaving SRI

in 2003, he has focused on the mechanization of conservation agriculture principally for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

<!-- image -->

Scott Justice is an Agricultural Mechanization Specialist working for the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT) based in Nepal. He has been working in small scale mechanization and rural development issues for nearly 20 years in South and South East Asia, subSaharan Africa, and Haiti. His contention is that if agricultural R&amp;D projects and programs can learn from and apply the diverse patterns of small scale mechanization and energy policies in South

and South East Asia, agricultural growth in sub-Saharan Africa will also give rise to rural employment and broad based rural development.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

David Kahan is a principal scientist working for the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT) based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Prior to this, he was a Senior Officer in Agribusiness and Enterprise Development at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) as Principal Officer Agricultural Innovation and Extension. He has over 30 years developing country experience in agricultural and rural development in Africa, Asia, the Caribbe-

an and the Middle East. His specialization is in the areas of agribusiness development, agricultural extension, farm business management, farm economics, natural resource management, marketing and value chain development. He holds a PhD in agricultural management and rural development from the University of Reading.

<!-- image -->

Richard Rose is Technical Director -Programs for the International Development Enterprises (iDE) in Bangladesh where is he is responsible for the Food Security and Nutrition and Agricultural Markets portfolios. Richard has 8 years of experience working in private sector development for Business Membership Organizations and international NonGovernment Organizations. Richard holds an MSc in Urbanization and Development from the London School of Economics.

Saidi Mkomwa is the Executive Secretary of the African Conservation Tillage Network (ACT), a pan-African not-forprofit organisation, with a mandate to spearhead the wide scale adoption by farmers of conservation agriculture since 2008. Saidi has over 30 years of rural technology and research for development experience acquired from heading the Agricultural Engineering Research Department with the Ministry of Agriculture in

<!-- image -->

Tanzania as project engineer of the MEDA implemented Mbeya Oxenization Project.

Pascal Kaumbutho is CEO of the Kenya Network for Dissemination of Agricultural Technologies (KENDAT) and Chairman of AgriMech Africa Ltd. He is a former Senior Lecturer of the University of Nairobi. He is a pro-active member of several rural development and entrepreneur networks, locally and internationally. He is also a farmer and marketer of horticultural produce and has vast experience in agribusiness-led rural devel-

opment, with particular interest in powering farm operations for efficient use of labour, rural logistics, intermediate means of transport and agricultural input and output marketing systems. He has a PhD from Michigan State University in USA and is a Chartered Agricultural Engineer and Member of the UK Institute of Agricultural Engineers.

<!-- image -->

John Sariah is a Principal Agriculture Research Scientist at the Selian Agricultural Research Institute (SARI) in Tanzania. He is leading a number of a project in the Northern Zone of Tanzania on sustainable intensification. He holds a PhD in Molecular Plant Breeding from the University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Bruno Gerard is the Director of the Global Conservation Agriculture Program of the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT). He leads a team of 40 international scientists focusing on sustainable intensification of maize and wheat-based systems in Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and Latin America. Before joining CIMMYT, he worked for the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) in Niger and the International Live-

<!-- image -->

stock Research Institute (ILRI) in Ethiopia. He was trained as agricultural engineer and irrigation engineer, holding M.Sc. degrees from the University Catholique de Louvain and Utah State University and a Ph.D. from the plant nutrition department at the University of Hohenheim.

Raymond Nazare is a research and development engineer and lecturer at the University of Zimbabwe. He is leading a number of projects in Ethiopia on mechanization research. Raymond has particular interest in the development of energy conserving field mechanisation systems. He holds an MSc from Cranfield Institute of Technology, UK.

Girma Moges is the director of the Agricultural Mechanization Research Directorate of the Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research (EIAR). He is leading a number of projects in Ethiopia on mechanization research. He holds an MSc in Agricultural and Bioresource Engineering from the University of Wageningen, the Netherlands.