## Southern  Agrarian  Labor  Contracts  as Impediments to Cotton Mechanization

WARREN  C.  WHATLEY

The traditional view of cotton mechanization, first advanced by rural  sociologists in  the  1920s,  is  that  southern  agrarian  institutions  impeded  progress.  Recently their view has been questioned. New studies attribute much of the southern lag to factors  like  small-scale  production,  cheap  labor,  the  cotton  crop,  and  environment. I contribute to the debate by emphasizing how the structure of the southern economy  encouraged  landlords  to  use  annual  labor  contracts  that hindered attempts to mechanize. I present evidence that supports the traditional view and suggest how the incentive structure of annual labor contracts delayed invention of the  mechanical cotton  picker.

W hen comparing mechanization in the Cotton South with other crop regions of America the lag in the South is striking. The mechanical cotton picker that revolutionized the rural South was first marketed in  1942-over a hundred years after  the widespread use of the mechanical  wheat  harvester  in the Midwest, and almost a hundred  years  after the  first  patent  on the picker  principle  was granted  in  1850.'  By one measure South Carolina was nine to thirteen years behind California in cotton  harvest  mechanization  after  World  War II.  Prior  to  1940  the 2 South  had approximately  half  the national  average  number  of tractors per acre. The ratio rose to 1.0 by  1955.

Why the southern  lag? The most  commonly  used  model  of agricultural mechanization is the threshold model which argues that the largest units  of  production should  mechanize  first.   Studies  by  Moses  S. 3 Musoke, Nicholas  Sargen, Robert Ankli, myself, and others  show that

Journal  of  Economic  History, Vol. XLVII,  No.  1 (Mar.  1987).  ' The  Economic  History Association. All rights reserved.  ISSN 0022-0507.

The author is Assistant  Professor of Economics,  University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,  Michigan 48109. The article has benefited  from  the comments of Gavin Wright, Paul David, Donald  Harris, Cathy McHugh, Lee Alston, Stanley Engerman, participants of the Research Triangle Workshop in  Economic  History,  and participants  of the CCHROME/Economic  History  Workshop at The University of Michigan. The author would also like to thank Lee Alston for making available his sample  of  southern  counties,  Greg  Lennes,  Head  Archivist  at  the  International Harvester Company  Archives  in Chicago,  Illinois,  and the referees  and editors  of this  JOURNAL  for very helpful  comments on an earlier version of this  paper.

1 On the reaper see Paul David, "The Mechanization of Reaping in the Ante-Bellum  Midwest," in Paul David, Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Growth: Essays on the American and British Experiences in the Nineteenth  Century (Cambridge,  1975). On the picker  see James H. Street, The New Revolution in the Cotton Economy; Mechanization and its Consequences (Chapel Hill, 1957).

2 Moses S. Musoke and Alan L. Olmstead,  "The Rise of the Cotton  Industry  in California: A Comparative Perspective," this JOURNAL, 42 (June  1982), pp.  405-406.

3 See  Paul  David,  "A Contribution  to the Theory  of Diffusion,"  CREG  Memorandum  No.  71 (Stanford  University,  1969).

large  farms  contemplating  adoption  of  new  technologies  had  a  cost advantage over smaller farms.  The tenant plantations in the South were 4 by  far  the  South's  largest  units  of  production.  In  1910 they  were five times  larger  than  the  average  American  farm.  Yet  data  from  the  1930 census show that plantations lagged behind in mechanization (see Table 5).

The traditional  explanation for this southern anomaly emphasizes the retarding influence  of southern  agrarian  institutions.  First  advanced  by rural  sociologists  working  at  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  and agricultural  experimental  stations  in  the  1920s,  this  indictment  covers every  aspect  of cotton  mechanization  from  the invention  and  adoption of the  cotton  picker to the adoption of the all-purpose tractor.   Several 5 economists  and  economic  historians  advance  it  as  well. James  Street, for  example,  finds  the  impact  of the  southern  tenant  plantation  on  the general  "rationalization"  of southern  agriculture  to  be  "stultifying." 6 Heywood Fleisig blames the "structure of the economy" for  "reducing the number of people with a stake in contriving a solution, increasing the difficulty of  disseminating  any  successful  solutions,  and  reducing  the scale of operation,"  all of which discouraged  successful  harvest  mechanization.   And  Jay  Mandle has gathered  evidence  showing  there  was 7 less interest  in mechanization  in the South, particularly in states  where the  tenant  plantation  was  extensive. 8

The  traditional  view  does not  go unchallenged.  Sargen  and  Musoke argue that  small-scale production, cheap labor, uneven terrain, and  the cotton  crop  itself  were  the  primary  deterrents  to  the  use  of tractors  in

4 See  Warren  C.  Whatley,  "Institutional  Change  and  Mechanization  in  the  Cotton  South," (Ph.D. diss., Stanford  University,  1983), chap. 3; Nicholas Sargen, "Tractorization"  in the United States and  its  Relevance  for Developing  Countries (New  York, 1979);  Moses  S.  Musoke, "Mechanizing Cotton Production  in the American  South: The Tractor,  1915-1960," Explorations in Economic  History, 18 (Apr.  1981); Robert  E.  Ankli,  "Horses  vs. Tractors  on the Corn  Belt," Agricultural  History, 54 (Jan.  1980); Robert  E. Ankli,  H.  Dan  Helberg,  and John  H.  Thompson, "The  Adoption  of the Tractor  in Western  Canada," Canadian Studies  in Rural History,  2 (Apr. 1979), pp.  244-61.

5 See  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  "Plantation  Organization  and  Operation  in the  YazooMississippi  Delta  Area,"  Technical  Bulletin  No.  1269 (Oct.  1924); Harald  Pedersen  and  Arthur Raper,  "The  Cotton  Plantation  in  Transition,"  Mississippi  Agricultural  Experimental  Station, Bulletin No. 508 (Jan.  1954); Frank  Welch, "The  Plantation Land Tenure System in Mississippi," Mississippi  Agricultural  Experimental  Station,  Bulletin  No. 385 (June  1943); U.S. Department of Agriculture,  "Utilization  and Cost of Power on Mississippi and Arkansas Plantations," Technical Bulletin No. 497 (Dec.  1935); Mississippi Agricultural  Experimental  Station,  "Farm  Power in the Yazoo-Mississippi  Delta,"  Bulletin  No.  295  (Nov.  1931); and  The  National  Research  Project, "Changes in Technology and Labor Requirements in Crop Production: Cotton," Report No. A-7 (Philadelphia,  1938). Also see Gilbert Fite, "Mechanization of Cotton Production Since World War II," Agricultural  History, 55  (Jan. 1980),  pp.  190-207;  Gilbert  Fite,  "Recent  Progress  in  the Mechanization of Cotton Production in the U.S.," Agricultural History, 24 (Jan.  1950); and Street, The New Revolution, pp.  104-106.

- 6 Street, The New  Revolution, p. 34.
- 7 Heywood  Fleisig,  "Mechanizing  the Cotton  Harvest  in the  Nineteenth-Century  South,"  this JOURNAL,  25  (Dec. 1965) p. 706.

8 Jay Mandle, The Roots of Black Poverty: The Southern Plantation Economy After the Civil War (Durham,  1978), chap. 5.

the Cotton South.  In two separate studies, Richard Day and Lee Alston 9 find  a negative statistical relationship between share tenancy and tractor use,  but  neither  infers  that  share  tenancy  impeded  tractor  adoption. Instead,  they  assume  exogenous  changes  in  the  availability  of  new production  technologies, like the tractor  and the cotton  picker,  reduce the incentive to use share tenant contracts. 10 And recently Musoke and Alan  Olmstead  compared  cotton  harvest  mechanization  in  California and the South and conclude that their finding "calls into question  some of  the  traditional  emphases  on  the  retarding  role  of  southern  institutions." 11

I  argue here that  southern  institutions  like annual  share tenancy  and share cropping did impede mechanization. Labor demand in the Cotton South was very seasonal and labor markets were thin. Many plantations used  annual  labor  contracts  to  reduce  seasonal  fluctuations  in  labor cost. But annual labor contracts also made it difficult  to mechanize large portions  of  plantations.  I  also  argue  that  the  debate  concerning  the relationship  between  mechanization  and  southern  agrarian  institutions should make a sharper distinction  between  partial  and complete  mechanization  because  institutional impediments  to  mechanization were more  severe  when  only  part of the production process could be mechanized.

## SEASONALITY  AND ANNUAL LABOR  CONTRACTS

The  "making  of  a  cotton  crop"  is  as  much  an  art  as  a  science. 12 Through repeated trial and error a set of practices evolved  that  proved most  effective  at  utilizing  available  resources  to  shape  the  forces  of nature into cotton.  The farmer  began each  year by preparing  the field. Cutting  sprouts  and  cleaning  ditches  and  drains  preceded  the  most strenuous task of plowing the field to turn last year's soil. He began this year's crop by harrowing (or pulverizing) the soil to make it malleable.

Bedding  and  rebedding  the  field  by  throwing  two  or  more  furrows together to form a ridge was the next activity. If used, fertilizer was then applied,  followed  by  the  planting.  At  this  stage  the farmer  faced  some crucial  decisions.  Should  the  crop  be  planted  in wide  rows  with  wide

9 Sargen, "Tractorization"  in the  United States; Musoke,  "Mechanizing  Cotton  Production." Sargen's calculations are for the wheat belt, but  he makes inferences  about  the  South.  Musoke's calculations are for the South, but they do not incorporate many important features of the problem like  multi-row  animal  techniques,  capacity  constraints,  and  the  tenant  plantation.  For  a  more complete  calculation  with  results  critical  of  Sargen  and  Musoke,  see  Whatley, "Institutional Change and Mechanization,"  chaps. 3, 4.

10 Richard H. Day, "The Economics of Technological Change and the Demise of the Sharecropper," American Economic Review, 57 (June  1967), pp. 427-49; Lee  Alston,  "Tenure  Choice  in Southern Agriculture,  1930-1960," Explorations in Economic History, 18 (Apr.  1981), pp. 211-32. "  Musoke and Olmstead,  "The  Rise of the Cotton  Industry,"  p. 411.

12 The following  draws  heavily  on  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture,  "Farming  Practices  in the Cultivation  of Cotton,"  Technical  Bulletin  No. 511 (Mar.  1917).

Figure  1 presents the seasonal distribution of labor hours for a farmer producing  an  acre  of  cotton  with  the  "folklore"  technology,  which consisted  of a mule and  one-row plow for  the preharvest  activities  and a pair of hands for the harvest. The Appendix describes in detail how the chart  was  constructed.  It  took  157 labor  hours  to  produce  an  acre  of cotton  using the folklore  technology: 77 hours  to prepare and  cultivate

<!-- image -->

FIGURE  1

SEASONAL DISTRIBUTION  OF LABOR HOURS PER ACRE OF COTTON USING THE MULE AND TRACTOR  TECHNIQUES

Sources: See  Appendix.

spacing of the plants  in each row to let in more  sunlight to kill the boll weevil grubs that fall to the ground? Should the seed be planted in close rows  with  thickly  spaced  plants  to  accelerate  maturation  and  possibly increase  yield? Should  the seed be planted thickly  and  later thinned  to assure  a  sturdy  plant?  Or  should  the  seed  be  set  systematically  and evenly  spaced  to  eliminate  thinning,  running  the  risk,  however,  of producing  a less-than-sturdy  plant?

After these  decisions  were  made  the  crop  had  to  be  cultivated. Thinning  at  the  appropriate  time, plowing  the  rows  to  assist  drainage, applying a side dressing of fertilizer,  and keeping the field free of weeds occupied  the  farmer  until  the  crop  was  "laid  by"  in  the  sun.  Once cultivation  put  the crop ahead of the weeds, the farmer  had to wait  for the chemistry  of the  sun and soil to bring the plants  to fruition.  During this  time  he  was  relatively  free  from  the field.

Next the crop had to be harvested.  It could either be picked by hand, carefully  removing  only  the meat  of  the  plant,  or  it  could  be  snapped from  the  stalk,  taking the entire boll. Once picked and taken to the gin, the farmer  again  had  time away from  the field.

an acre and 80 to harvest it. For a successful  cotton crop the  157 hours had  to  be applied in a predetermined sequence at predetermined intervals.  The  performance-rate  estimates  and  time  schedules  used  to distribute the  157 hours over 12 months are actual data from  plantations in the Mississippi Delta. Some cotton regions required less weeding than the Delta, and some had lower yields. Farmers in the semi-arid areas of Texas, for example, did less thinning than southeastern farmers who, in turn,  did  less  thinning  than  Delta farmers.  Also,  yields  were  generally highest  in the  Delta  and  lowest  on the Texas  plains.

But the common  characteristic  relevant  here  is the  extreme  seasonality  of  the  labor  inputs.  Every  region  had  a  pronounced  preharvest peak  and  a  pronounced  harvest  peak  separated  by  low  employment periods  in  mid-summer  and  mid-winter.  Many  landlords  were  concerned  about  finding  enough  hands  to  meet  peak  demands  for  labor within the allotted time. In agriculture it normally takes one full  year to produce  a  crop,  and  the  timeliness  of  labor  inputs  is  everything.  A shortage of hands when the crop must be harvested  can jeopardize  the "productivity" of all previously applied labor; a rotting cotton boll in an unharvested field turns high-quality cultivation labor into a low yield. 13 And nature  makes  it so that  a botched job  cannot  be redone.

Employer  apprehension about  the supply of hands  during  peak periods  was  further intensified in  the Cotton  South.  The  extreme seasonality of  labor inputs  meant  landlords  who  did  not  maintain workers on annual contract had to hire and fire most of their labor force several  times  a  season.  Massive  quantities  of  laborers  were  involved, and  local  concentration  in  cotton  meant  everyone  was  hiring  or firing large numbers of workers at the same time. A year of unexpected good weather  would  raise  everyone's yield and  everyone's demand  for harvest  hands, causing the kind of havoc in harvest  labor markets  that could threaten  the profitability  of the entire  year's  operation.

Thus, landlords in the South wanted to do more than equate the daily marginal  value  product  of  labor  to  the  daily  wage.  They  were  also concerned  about  the  conditions  influencing  the  availability  of  hands during peak periods. 14 Plantations located near urban labor markets and facing  elastic  supplies  of  labor  could  meet  seasonal  and  unexpected demands  for  additional  workers  at  the  going  wage  by  tapping  urban labor  supplies  and  using  short-term  wage  contracts.  Most  plantations, however,  were  located  a  distance  from urban  centers  where  labor

markets  were  thin  and  where  marginal labor costs  were  increasing.  In these communities unexpected  and seasonal increases in labor demand could increase average labor cost significantly. These plantations had an incentive  to  employ  hands  on  long-term  contract  to  guarantee  their availability  when  needed.  A Mississippi  agricultural  experimental  station  report  described  the  situation  in the  1930s:

The plantation labor force includes not only families and individuals who reside on the plantation throughout the crop year, but also seasonal workers, the latter being needed especially for chopping and picking cotton. Some mechanized plantations, located  near towns that afforded  a convenient supply of labor, depend very largely on such workers. But most operators prefer to have a large number of workers residing on the plantation. Many planters  believe  that  resident  labor  is  more  efficient;  and  most  of  them  do  not deem it prudent to depend too largely upon outside labor for which the competition may be great  in  seasons  of peak  labor-load. 15

Landlords at a distance from towns first recruited wage laborers  from the ranks of the plantation's tenants not busy on their own crops.  "This class  of  labor  was  most  satisfactory,  but  the  quantity  was  limited" because  croppers  had  to  tend  their  crops  precisely  when  landlords needed  them  in  the  wage  system.  The  search  for  wage  laborers  then moved  out  into  the  surrounding  towns.  But  "these  laborers  had  to  be hauled  daily" and "competition  for  their  services  had  made  them independent  . . . " Next,  planters  combed  areas  farther  away,  where workers had to be  "recruited  and assembled on the place, but as a rule they returned to their homes at their own expense."  Some landlords in the Delta went as far as southern Texas to recruit Mexicans, "but it was not known just  how much could be depended upon at a given wage." 16

The share-tenant and sharecropper arrangements used on plantations were  solutions,  and  this  partially  explains  why  the  contracts  were  so attractive  to  southern  employers. Contracts  were always for  the growing  season  and  tenants  were  not  paid  until  the  end  of  the  season,  an incentive  for  the  tenant  and  his  family  to  remain  on  the  plantation through  the  harvest.  In  this way  landlords  could  be  sure  that  at  least their resident  labor force  would  be available for  peak-load  periods.

## ANNUAL  LABOR CONTRACTS AND PREHARVEST  MECHANIZATION

A resident  labor force  on annual contract  also reduced  the  incentive to partially mechanize production by making it difficult  for landlords to save  cost  whenever  the  machine  being  considered  left  a  peak  in  the

annual labor pattern. This was very apparent  when available technologies  permitted  preharvest  mechanization  but not harvest  mechanization.  The problem  was observed  as early  as  1924  by researchers and field agents at the U.S. Department  of Agriculture:

Physical conditions in the area are well adapted  to the use of large-scale  production equipment, but the large amounts and uneven distribution of hand labor on cotton have retarded  the  fuller  use  of  such  equipment.  The  maintenance  of  a labor  force  to  meet these peak  needs  has not provided  inducement  for the widespread adoption of labor-saving  machinery  when labor is employed  on a share basis. 17

It  was not the share feature  of the  share-tenant  contract  that  created the problem for partial mechanization. The problem was caused by the long-term  nature of the contract and the fact  that the payment to labor was not tied directly to the number of hours worked. A similar problem would  have  existed  for  annual  wage  contracts  that  paid  a  constant periodic wage over the year regardless of the number of hours worked. The  choice  of  one  kind  of  annual  labor  contract  over  another  was determined by factors  like risk-sharing  and transactions  costs. 18

The  situation  is  illustrated in  Figure 1,  which  also  presents  the seasonal  pattern  of labor  input  when the preharvest  technology  is the tractor  and its attachments.  The tractor  reduced  the number  of labor hours per acre from  157 to 118. All the savings occurred in preharvest labor, which declined from 77 to 38 hours. The tractor, however, did not reduce  the  number  of  hands  needed  to  produce  cotton.  While  the preharvest  peak  was reduced  to approximately  15 hands  per acre, 30 hands per acre were still needed to harvest the crop in the allotted  time and  landlords  remained  concerned  about  their  availability.  If  the 30 hands were hired as annual share-tenants, then profit-maximizing  landlords would find it difficult  to adopt the tractor. A landlord, who wanted to  save  on  labor  costs  by  using  the  tractor,  could  fire  some  of his tenants, but this  would  leave the harvest  unattended  and reexpose the enterprise  to the kind  of risk  annual  labor  contracts  were  designed  to reduce.

Landlords could have secured annual tenants and still mechanized the preharvest by charging tenants a fee when the tractor was used on their plot. A landlord's ability to do this and still retain his tenants  depended on the tenant  families'  alternative  income  possibilities. The opportunities  for  wage  employment  in  agriculture  were  as  uncertain  and as cyclical  as  the  landlords'  demand  for  labor.  In  general,  non-tenant

- 17 U.S. Department of Agriculture,  "Plantation  Organization  and Operation,"  pp.  59-60.

18 On the determinants of the length of the contract see Whatley, "A History of Mechanization"; Gerald Jaynes, Branches  Without Roots: Genesis of the Black  Working Class (Oxford,  1986); and Bardhan,  "Wages  and  Unemployment."  The literature  on the share  aspect  of the contract  is voluminous.  For a sample  see Steven  Cheung, The Theory of Share  Tenancy (Chicago,  1969); Alston,  "Tenure Choice"; Lee Alston and Robert  Higgs, "Contractual  Mix in Southern Agriculture since the Civil War: Facts, Hypotheses and Tests," this JOURNAL, 42 (June 1982), pp. 327-53.

income for the year  was related  to the wage paid for unskilled jobs in cities  and seasonal jobs  in rural  areas. 19 In December  of each  year a laborer had the option to secure an annual share-tenant contract with a landlord and be guaranteed year-round employment in agriculture, or to commit himself to at least a year of uncertain short-term wage contracts. Given  a wage  in the broader  wage  labor  market,  the value  of annual tenant  contracts  offered  by local  landlords  tended  to  adjust  until the local  supply  and demand  for  tenants  equated. 20 If  landlords  tried  to charge  tenants  for the use of a tractor,  the value of the  share  tenant's contract  would be reduced and on the margin the tenant  would opt for a  year of uncertain  wage jobs, leaving the landlord exposed to the thin wage labor  market.

Thus,  most  opportunities  to  use the  tractor  were  found  on  land cultivated  by  wage  laborers.  But landlords  were  caught  in a web of counteracting forces that made  it  difficult to  establish the  proper conditions  for mechanization.  Uncertain,  and potentially  costly,  labor increased  the profitability  of adopting  labor-saving  tractors, but it also restricted  the amount  of land  amenable  for mechanization  by driving landlords  to use annual  share-tenant  contracts.  In this  way southern share tenancy impeded partial mechanization by redirecting the impact of high labor cost away from the adoption of labor-saving machinery and toward  the adoption  of small family-based  tenancies  that  could not be mechanized  profitably. 21

## PARTIAL  MECHANIZATION  IN THE PLANTATION  SOUTH

There  is  very  little empirical  evidence  on  how  plantations were divided  between  the two labor  systems,  primarily  because  the census recorded each tenancy and wage system as a separate  "farm."  Census enumerations  of plantations  were  conducted  in  1945, 1950, and  1954. County-level  information  about  the organization  of acreage  on planta-

19 For  a  formal  model  of  these  markets  and  some  econometric  evidence,  see  Whatley, "A History  of  Mechanization";  see  also  David  M.  G.  Newberry  and  J.  E.  Stiglitz,  "Risk  Sharing, Sharecropping  and Uncertain Labor  Markets,"  in  James  A.  Roumasset  et  al.,  eds., Risk, Uncertainty and Agricultural  Development (1980).

20 The  wage  is  assumed  to  be  exogenous  because  the  wage  labor  market  was  broader  in geographic  scope  than  the  tenant  market.  Tenants  had  to  signal  characteristics  such  as  credit worthiness and productivity to landlords. In addition, tenancy was a family-based  contract,  while wage contracts  tended  to attract  younger,  more  mobile  single men.  See  Whatley,  "A  History  of Mechanization";  Franklin  Allen, "On  the  Fixed  Nature  of  Sharecropping  Contracts," The Economic Journal, 95 (Mar.  1985), pp. 30-48. For  an excellent  account  of the  structure  of  these markets see Gavin Wright,  "Postbellum  Southern  Labor Markets," in Peter Kilby, ed., Quantity and  Quiddity: Essays  in Honor  of Stanley Lebergott (Middletown,  1987).

21 This occurs when an increase in the wage results in a percentage  increase  in the  equilibrium size of tenant plots that is greater than the percentage decline in the equilibrium number of tenants on  plantations.  Elsewhere  I  have  called  this  case  the  Strong  Interpretation  of  the  Institutional Hypothesis of mechanization. The Weak Interpretation is the simpler claim that the tenant  system was unmechanizable.  See Whatley,  "A History  of Mechanization,"  pp.  1204-7.

tions is available from  these  studies. But these  surveys are too late for the purpose here. In 1910 the Census Bureau conducted a special survey of tenant  plantations but published  only general  summary  statistics for states. 22 The  manuscripts  are  not  available,  and  the  bureau never published the county-level  data. The report contains a map of counties designated as  "plantation counties"  which  divides  the  South into plantation  and  non-plantation regions.  I  used  the  map to  compare mechanization  in the two subregions.

The 1910 survey denned a plantation as "a contiguous tract of land of considerable  area  under the general  supervision  or control  of a single individual or firm, all or part of such tract being divided into at least five smaller  tracts  which  are leased  out to  tenants." 23 Special  schedules were  distributed  throughout  the  South  where  enumerators  collected information  from  plantation  owners  and tenants.  These  returns  were later  crosschecked  for accuracy,  and after  examining  the results the Census Bureau confined the tabulation to 325 counties located in eleven southern  states  because:

For most  of the other counties in the South the number of plantations reported  was small, and  in some of them a great many of the schedules were not satisfactorily filled out, presumably because of the rarity of the plantation  system and the ignorance of the enumerator  as to its characteristics  and  significance. 24

Table  1 consists of descriptive statistics from that publication and shows the  extent  of the  system.

Information  has also  been  collected  on a  sample  of 250 southern countries,  25 from  each  of the 10 southern  states  running  from  North Carolina  to Texas. 25 Utilizing  the map published  in the  1910 report, these  250 counties  were  classified as  either "Plantation"  or "nonPlantation." Some  descriptive  statistics  were  taken  from the 1910 Census of Agriculture and are presented  in Tables 2 and 3.

The decennial census reported each tenure as a "farm"  regardless of its position in the local system of production. A virtue of the 1910 survey is that it provides  some idea of the extent to which units reported in the decennial  census  were  actually  part  of a larger  centralized  plantation system.  One  might  conclude  from the  decennial census  data,  for example,  that  the units  of  production  in the plantation  sectors  were

- 23 U.S.  Bureau  of the Census, Plantation  Farming in the United States (Washington, D.C., 1916), p.  13.

23 The sample was drawn from the  1930 census by Lee J. Alston. The same counties are used for 1910 and 1930 in this  study.  They are 25 from  each  of the following  ten states:  North  Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, Louisiana,  Mississippi, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. Only 240 of these were found in the 1910 census,  10 being part of other counties. These 10 were dropped from  the 1910 analysis.

TABLE  1 EXTENT OF TENANT PLANTATION  SYSTEM, 1910

|                 |     |    | Percent  of   |                                 | Plantation Improved Land        | Plantation Improved Land   | Plantation Improved Land    |
|-----------------|-----|----|---------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                 |     |    | Percent  of   | Average Plantation Size (acres) | Average Plantation Size (acres) | Percent Tenant             | Average Tenant Plot (acres) |
| Alabama         | 67  | 47 | 38.2%         | 738.7                           | 415.7                           | 80.1%                      | 31.6                        |
| Arkansas        | 75  | 23 | 39.4          | 615.7                           | 394.2                           | 84.7                       | 25.4                        |
| Georgia         | 146 | 70 | 37.1          | 787.6                           | 430.0                           | 82.3                       | 41.2                        |
| Louisiana       | 60  | 29 | 39.3          | 904.0                           | 480.1                           | 58.4                       | 23.5                        |
| Mississippi     | 79  | 45 | 47.9          | 663.5                           | 401.6                           | 78.1                       | 25.1                        |
| North  Carolina | 98  | 21 | 19.6          | 654.1                           | 299.1                           | 76.5                       | 30.0                        |
| South  Carolina | 43  | 35 | 30.8          | 677.6                           | 323.8                           | 77.4                       | 29.3                        |
| Tennessee       | 96  | 11 | 23.7          | 488.6                           | 318.1                           | 81.0                       | 29.9                        |
| Texas           | 245 | 41 | 20.0          | 857.0                           | 505.3                           | 81.9                       | 47.7                        |

Source: U.S. Bureau  of the Census, Plantation Farming  in the  United States (Washington,  D.C., 1916).

smaller  than  the  units  in  the  surrounding  areas  (see  Table  2).  But  the data from  the  1910 survey  show  how  the  standard  census  definition  of a farm  masked  the  true  landholding  pattern.  In  Mississippi  45  of  the  79 counties had  an  average of  47.9  percent of  their improved land in plantations which  averaged  663.5  acres  in  size.  On  these plantations 78.1  percent  of improved  land  was  in tenant  plots  which  averaged  25.1 acres.  To  suggest  that  these  plantations  were  small  landholdings would be  absurd; their average size  was more  than  five  times  that  of  the

TABLE  2 SIZE  DISTRIBUTION  OF CENSUS  "FARMS"  IN PLANTATION  AND NONPLANTATION  COUNTIES,  1910 (in  percentages)

|                 | Less  than 50 Acres   | Less  than 50 Acres   | 50-174 Acres    | 50-174 Acres   | Greater  than 174 Acres   | Greater  than 174 Acres   |
|-----------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------|----------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|                 | Non- Plantation       | Plantation            | Non- Plantation | Plantation     | Non- Plantation           | Plantation                |
| Sample          | 38.2%                 | 58.7%                 | 43.0%           | 31.9%          | 18.7%                     | 9.4%                      |
| Alabama         | 45.8                  | 54.3                  | 41.2            | 36.4           | 13.7                      | 9.3                       |
| Arkansas        | 39.1                  | 72.9                  | 50.1            | 21.0           | 10.8                      | 6.1                       |
| Georgia         | 41.9                  | 52.8                  | 38.1            | 37.0           | 20.0                      | 10.2                      |
| Louisiana       | 51.9                  | 57.8                  | 36.1            | 30.9           | 12.0                      | 11.3                      |
| Mississippi     | 48.4                  | 74.5                  | 40.3            | 19.0           | 11.3                      | 6.5                       |
| North  Carolina | 46.0                  | 53.9                  | 42.3            | 32.1           | 11.7                      | 14.0                      |
| Oklahoma        | 24.5                  | a                     | 53.8            | a              | 18.8                      | a                         |
| South  Carolina | 71.5                  | 60.0                  | 19.3            | 31.2           | 9.2                       | 8.8                       |
| Tennessee       | 43.6                  | 46.5                  | 43.6            | 39.2           | 12.8                      | 14.3                      |
| Texas           | 17.6                  | 38.7                  | 34.0            | 52.5           | 48.4                      | 8.8                       |

Source: 250-county  sample,  1910.

TABLE  3

| Black Farms   | Plantation Non- Plantation Plantation   | 32.1% 40.7% 15.7% 19.4 52.4% 42.2   | Georgia 8.9 .  20.5 71.9 53.7   | 27.7 31.3 47.4 44.2 23.9 33.8 19.3 47.4 78.2   | 57.1 39.6 a 67.7 46.2 13.3 11.8 66.1 45.1 a 52.5   | 27.6 34.3 7.5 4.3 10.2 32.9   |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Tenancy       | Plantation                              |                                     |                                 |                                                | a                                                  | 40.4 41.7 55.5                |
| Share Tenancy |                                         | 34.0                                | 43.5 39.9                       | 40.0                                           |                                                    |                               |
|               | Non-                                    | 28.1                                | 29.7 36.7                       | 23.6                                           |                                                    |                               |
|               | Plantation 40.6% Plantation             | 43.7 67.0% 64.1                     | 35.1 48.8 73.0 74.9             | 55.6 76.9                                      | 55.2                                               | 47.4 56.8                     |
|               | Non-                                    | Sample Alabama                      | Arkansas                        | 35.8 39.6                                      | 35.1                                               | South  Carolina 34.9 38.0     |
|               |                                         |                                     |                                 | Louisiana Mississippi                          | North  Carolina Oklahoma                           | Tennessee Texas               |

" No plantation  counties  in  Oklahoma. Source: 250-county  sample,  1910.

## ESTIMATED COEFFICIENTS  OF PROBIT MODEL OF PLANTATION  SOUTH,  1910

TABLE  4

| Variable                                |   Coefficient  Estimate |   r-statistic |
|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------|
| Crop-mix                                |                    1.27 |          0.96 |
| Cotton  yield                           |                   -0.04 |         -0.04 |
| Value of tools  per  acre               |                    0.12 |          1.71 |
| Population  density                     |                   -4.83 |         -2.21 |
| Mules per  horse                        |                    0.57 |          3.57 |
| Percent  tenancy                        |                    2.67 |          2.45 |
| Percent  black  farms                   |                    1.36 |          1.62 |
| Percent  of farms  less  than  50 acres |                    5.3  |          3.03 |
| Constant                                |                   -5.29 |         -5.83 |
| Number of  observations                 |                  240    |         -5.83 |
| Log-likelihood  function                |                  -58.3  |         -5.83 |
| Mean of dependent  variable             |                    0.37 |         -5.83 |

Notes: Dependent  Variable  =  1 if census  classified  county  as  plantation;  0 otherwise.  The  total number of counties  is 240 (152 plantation, 88 plantation)  rather than 250 because  10 counties  from the  1930 sample  were  merged  with  at least  one  other  county  in  1910 and  were dropped  from  the sample.

average  American  farm.  The smaller  census-classified  farms  in  these regions simply reflect  the extent to which planters  secured  their  annual labor inputs  through the market for annual  tenants.

I  used  a  probit  model  to identify  factors  that  induced  the  Census Bureau to classify  a county as "plantation." 26 The results are reported in  Table  4.  The  independent  variables  are  various  measures  of the socioeconomic  structure  of southern  agriculture  like the crop-mix (the share of land in cotton), the kind of work-stock  used, the size of farms as defined  by the census, the extent of tenancy, the population  density and its racial  composition.

According to the results, a plantation  county was one of low population density with  small black tenancies utilizing the mule as a source of power.  The low population density  reflects  thin  labor  markets  and the fact  that  most  plantations  were  located  in rural  communities  removed from  urban  labor supplies. Small annual tenancies reduced wide fluctuations in  annual wage  bills.  In  general  the  results suggest  that  a plantation county had a high probability of being in the heart of the Deep South,  a fact  that  could  have  been  surmised  from  the map published with the  1910 survey. What is perhaps most informative is the induction that our image of what existed in 1910 coincides  with what the special census enumerators  observed.

One might expect large plantations in the Plantation  South to consol-

26 The probit model is a specification of the relationship between a binary dependent variable and a  continuous  explanatory  variable  that  eliminates  the  heteroskedastic  nature  of  the  disturbance term.  See Jan  Kmenta, Elements  of Econometrics (New  York,  1971), pp. 425-28.

TABLE 5 ACRES  PER  TRACTOR,  1930

|                 |   Non-Plantation  South | Plantation  South   |
|-----------------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| South           |                    1933 | 2471                |
| Southeast   3   |                    1261 | 2536                |
| Delta"          |                    2780 | 2216                |
| Alabama         |                    1432 | 3685                |
| Arkansas        |                    3560 | 2188                |
| Georgia         |                    2304 | 2842                |
| Louisiana       |                    2563 | 2313                |
| Mississippi     |                    1845 | 1806                |
| North  Carolina |                     713 | 789                 |
| Oklahoma        |                    2520 |                     |
| South  Carolina |                    1355 | 1733                |
| Tennessee       |                    1432 | 1883                |
| Texas           |                    1138 | 8612                |

Source: 250-county  sample,  1930.

idate  their tenant holdings  and  adopt  the  tractor when  it  became available in the  1920s. At the very least large plantations  would have a size  advantage  over  surrounding  farms.  But  as  Table  5 shows,  during the  1920s  plantations  did  not  mechanize  faster  than  the  surrounding farms, and in most cases they mechanized appreciably slower. One gets a  better  picture  by  grouping  the  states  into  Southeast  and  Delta  as defined  in  Table  5.  The  pattern  holds  for  the  Southeast.  To  be  more precise, in 1930 plantation counties in the Southeast had more than twice as many acres per tractor as smaller farms in the surrounding areas. In the Delta states, plantation  counties  had  slightly fewer  acres per tractor  than surrounding farms,  but  this may  reflect  the  sparse  use  of  tractors  in  the surrounding Western Hillys. The Western Hillys is the exception because there is very little difference  in the ratio for  the plantation  counties in all three groupings while farmers in the Western Hillys of the Delta lagged far behind farmers  in the Southeast and the South.

Why didn't  landlords  consolidate  tenancies  into large  wage  systems and use the tractor? Is there any evidence that the tractor was  confined to  large  wage  systems?  And  if  so,  was  it  the  seasonality of  labor requirements in cotton production and the structure of labor markets in the  Plantation  South  that  reduced  the  landlord's  incentive  to  consolidate? To answer these questions, I use 1930 county-level census data on the  South.  I  chose 1930  to  assess  how  the  structure  of  the  tenant plantation  economy  affected  partial  mechanization  because  1930  falls between the availability of the tractor and the mechanical cotton picker.

As noted  earlier,  the  1930 census  did  not  report  county-level  information on plantations.  Instead  it classified  share  tenants  as  "farmers"

## ESTIMATION OF THRESHOLD SCALE, 1930

TABLE  6

|                               | (dependent variable is percent of farms with a tractor) Coefficient  Estimate   | (dependent variable is percent of farms with a tractor) Coefficient  Estimate   | (dependent variable is percent of farms with a tractor) Coefficient  Estimate   | (dependent variable is percent of farms with a tractor) Coefficient  Estimate   | (dependent variable is percent of farms with a tractor) Coefficient  Estimate   | (dependent variable is percent of farms with a tractor) Coefficient  Estimate   |     |
|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
| Percent of Farms Greater Than | Farms                                                                           | Share of Cropland  in:                                                          | Share of Cropland  in:                                                          | Share of Cropland  in:                                                          | Share of Cropland  in:                                                          | Planta- tion                                                                    |     |
| Percent of Farms Greater Than | Farms                                                                           | Cotton                                                                          | Tobacco                                                                         | Sugar                                                                           | Rice                                                                            | Dummy                                                                           | R 2 |
| 9 acres                       | 0.2277                                                                          | -0.1159                                                                         | -0.1705                                                                         | -4.82                                                                           | 0.1726                                                                          | -0.0028                                                                         | .20 |
| 9 acres                       | (2.19)                                                                          | (5.06)                                                                          | (2.65)                                                                          | (2.56)                                                                          | (2.57)                                                                          | (0.27)                                                                          |     |
| 19 acres                      | 0.0724                                                                          | -0.0968                                                                         | -0.1561                                                                         | -5.18                                                                           | 0.1751                                                                          | -0.0021                                                                         | .20 |
| 19 acres                      | (1.96)                                                                          | (4.21)                                                                          | (2.36)                                                                          | (2.76)                                                                          | (2.60)                                                                          | (0.21)                                                                          |     |
| 49 acres                      | 0.1531                                                                          | -0.0510                                                                         | -0.0717                                                                         | -3.66                                                                           | 0.2236                                                                          | 0.0135                                                                          | .29 |
| 49 acres                      | (5.92)                                                                          | (2.21)                                                                          | (1.13)                                                                          | (2.05)                                                                          | (3.50)                                                                          | (1.33)                                                                          |     |
| 99 acres                      | 0.3021                                                                          | -0.0173                                                                         | 0.0197                                                                          | -2.59                                                                           | 0.2299                                                                          | 0.0229                                                                          | .50 |
| 99 acres                      | (12.39)                                                                         | (0.90)                                                                          | (0.37)                                                                          | (1.73)                                                                          | (4.32)                                                                          | (2.73)                                                                          |     |
| 174 acres                     | 0.5661                                                                          | -0.0084                                                                         | 0.0286                                                                          | -3.37                                                                           | 0.1752                                                                          | 0.0095                                                                          | .62 |
| 174 acres                     | (16.46)                                                                         | (0.51)                                                                          | (0.62)                                                                          | (2.50)                                                                          | (3.77)                                                                          | (1.34)                                                                          |     |
| 259 acres                     | 0.7312                                                                          | -0.0232                                                                         | -0.0061                                                                         | -3.61                                                                           | 0.1432                                                                          | 0.0032                                                                          | .66 |
| 259 acres                     | (18.41)                                                                         | (1.52)                                                                          | (0.14)                                                                          | (2.95)                                                                          | (3.28)                                                                          | (0.50)                                                                          |     |
| 499 acres                     | 0.8492                                                                          | -0.0777                                                                         | -0.1219                                                                         | -4.84                                                                           | 0.1451                                                                          | -0.0033                                                                         | .38 |
| 499 acres                     | (8.76)                                                                          | (3.89)                                                                          | (2.16)                                                                          | (2.93)                                                                          | (2.46)                                                                          | (0.37)                                                                          |     |
| 999 acres                     | 0.5373                                                                          | -0.1014                                                                         | -0.1773                                                                         | -5.24                                                                           | 0.1662                                                                          | -0.0047                                                                         | .22 |
| 999 acres                     | (3.08)                                                                          | (4.55)                                                                          | (2.80)                                                                          | (2.82)                                                                          | (2.50)                                                                          | (0.46)                                                                          |     |

Notes: Absolute  values  of  f-statistics are  in  parentheses.  The  intercept  is  not  reported.  The plantation  dummy  takes  the  value  1  if  the  county  is  designated  plantation  by  the 1910  Special Census on Plantation  Farming. It  is 0 otherwise.  All regressions  are  weighted  by the number of farms in the county  and are estimated  by OLS.

Source: 250-county  sample.

whether  they  lived  on  or  off  the  plantation.  The  data  do  permit  the calculation  of  the  percent  of farms  (tenant  and  owned)  in each  of  nine size classes. This is used to estimate the tractor threshold.  Eight simple regression  equations  are  estimated.  The  dependent  variable  in each  is the  percentage  of census-classified  farms  in each  county  with  a tractor in 1930. 27 An independent variable in each is the percent of farms  above one of the nine census-designated  size classes. In the first equation, for example, the farm  variable is the percent  of farms  with  at least 9 acres of  farmland;  in  the  second  equation,  it  is  the  percent  with  at  least  19 acres of farmland,  and so on. The object is to identify  the size cutoff that best  predicts  the  cross-county  variation  in  the  percent  of  farms  with tractors. 28 Variables measuring the allocation of land across major crops control  for  differences in  the  labor-saving  capacity  of  the  tractor  on different  crops. A dummy variable for plantation counties is included to see  if the  threshold  scale  differed  in the  two  subregions.

FIGURE  2 MARKET FOR TENANTS

<!-- image -->

The  results  are  reported  in  Table  6.  Using  the R s 2 as  measures  of goodness  of  fit,  the  equations  identify  259  acres  of  farmland  as  the approximate  tractor  threshold.  The  variation  in  the  percent  of  farms with over 259 acres of farmland  statistically explains over 66 percent of the  variation  in  the  percent  of  farms  with  a  tractor.  The R 2 for  each equation increases up to this size class, peaks at the 259-acre  equation, and then declines. The average cropland harvested on farms in this class was 85.9 acres and was much larger than the average share tenancy. The coefficient  on the plantation dummy is statistically insignificant  in every equation  except  one.

Next I estimate  the relationship  between  the percent  of farms  above the  threshold  scale  and  the  structure  of  local  labor  markets.  Countylevel  wage  data  are  unavailable  so I  am forced  to  use  a  reduced-form measure of labor supply and demand conditions, as diagramed in Figure 2. The local price of annual share-tenant labor should be reflected  in the average  size  of  local  tenant  plots  (I);  for  a  given  level  of  wages,  the average  size  of  tenant  plots  offered by  local  landlords  should  have adjusted  until supply and demand were equated. 29 On the supply side, a larger plot  size increased  the  number of families  seeking annual  sharetenant  contracts  because  it  increased  the  relative  value  of  those  contracts  for  laborers.  On  the  demand  side,  an  increase  in T reduced  the number of tenants  demanded  because  it decreased  the labor-land  ratio and  reduced  the  landlord's  net  revenue  per  acre  put  into  the  tenant system. At T* and N* the local market for annual share-tenants  cleared.

29 The wage is exogenized  because this market  is broader  in geographic  scope  than  the  tenant market and is beyond the determination  of local market  forces.

Counties  with  tighter  labor  markets  should  have  had  larger  average tenant  plots  because  improved  alternative  employment  opportunities would reduce the supply of tenants. Ceteris paribus, those counties also should  have  had  less  land  available  for mechanization  if  increased wages resulted  in a percentage decline in the number of tenants greater than  the  percentage  increase  in  the  size  of  tenant  plots.  Because  the wage elasticity  of the  size of the tenant plot is unambiguously  positive, variations  in the  quality-adjusted  average tenant  plot  should  be  a good proxy  for variations in the  wage  rate.  These two  variables move together  because  they  measure  competing  income  opportunities,  and because of that I have added yield and crop-mix variables to correct for any cross-county variations in the income generated on the average acre of land. An additional proxy is a variable measuring the percent of farms less than ten acres in size. The variable is included to capture the  effects of  underemployed  annual-tenant  laborers  available  for  harvesting  the wage system  at  zero gathering cost,  and  it  should be positively  associated with large  farms.

The  model  is  estimated  for  the  Plantation  South  and  for  the  nonPlantation  South. The results are reported in Table 7. The coefficient  of immediate interest is that on the variable measuring the average  size of share-tenant plots. In the non-Plantation South the coefficient  is positive and very  significant  statistically. The average  size of share tenancies in the  non-Plantation  South  was 42.3 acres  in  1930, considerably  smaller than the  threshold  scale  of 259 acres. Thus,  it is reasonable  to  assume that  most  farms  above  the threshold  were  owner-operated  farms  employing  laborers  on  wage  contracts.  The  positive  coefficient  on  share tenancies  implies  that  large  tenancies  were  found  in  counties  having large wage-labor  farms.

In contrast,  the coefficient  on share tenancy in the Plantation South is negative,  although  it  has  a high standard  error.  This is consistent  with the traditional  view of the Plantation South as an area in which laborers were  hired  on  annual  share,  instead  of  short-term  wage,  contracts. Where alternative income opportunities for labor were scarce, tenancies were  small.  Landlords  could  expand  their  wage  systems  because  they could  expect  to  find  adequate  labor  when  needed,  and  at  a  profitable wage.  Where  alternative  income possibilities  for  labor  were  abundant, landlords  had  to  pay  a higher  price for  annual  share-tenant  labor.  The average  size of  share tenancies  was larger,  and the wage systems  were smaller.

The coefficient  on share tenancy in the Plantation South is statistically insignificant  because  plantation  and  non-plantation  units  are  mixed  in the county-level aggregate figures. Even in the most plantationintensive  state  (Mississippi), census-designated  plantation counties had only  47.9  percent  of  their  improved  land  in  plantations  in  1910.  One section  of the  South,  however,  was almost exclusively  plantation.  The

## Labor Contracts  and Mechanization

TABLE  7 DETERMINANTS OF THE THRESHOLD SCALE OF PRODUCTION,  1930

|                             | Coefficient  Estimates  (xlO ) 3 (dependent  variable is percent of farms  above threshold)   | Coefficient  Estimates  (xlO ) 3 (dependent  variable is percent of farms  above threshold)   |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Independent  Variable       | Plantation  South                                                                             | Non-Plantation  South                                                                         |
|                             | (1)                                                                                           | (2)                                                                                           |
| Average size of share       | -0.08                                                                                         | 2.19                                                                                          |
| tenancy                     | (0.47)                                                                                        | (16.60)                                                                                       |
| Percent of farms  less than | -9.40                                                                                         | -36.52                                                                                        |
| 10 acres                    | (0.46)                                                                                        | (0.37)                                                                                        |
| Yields                      |                                                                                               |                                                                                               |
| Cotton                      | -66.04                                                                                        | -7.92                                                                                         |
|                             | (3.69)                                                                                        | (0.43)                                                                                        |
| Tobacco                     | 0.01                                                                                          | -0.01                                                                                         |
|                             | (1.63)                                                                                        | (0.81)                                                                                        |
| Sugar                       | -0.008                                                                                        | 0.06                                                                                          |
|                             | (0.23)                                                                                        | (0.58)                                                                                        |
| Rice                        | -0.36                                                                                         | -0.16                                                                                         |
| Share of cropland in        |                                                                                               |                                                                                               |
| Cotton                      | -73.05                                                                                        | -91.47                                                                                        |
|                             | (5.29)                                                                                        | (3.91)                                                                                        |
| Tobacco                     | -159.23                                                                                       | -45.05                                                                                        |
|                             | (5.50)                                                                                        | (0.73)                                                                                        |
| Sugar                       | -699.43                                                                                       | 2,093.30                                                                                      |
|                             | (0.59)                                                                                        | (0.82)                                                                                        |
| Rice                        | 37.94                                                                                         | 57.40                                                                                         |
|                             | (1.14)                                                                                        | (0.86)                                                                                        |
| Constant                    | 101.34                                                                                        | 16.63                                                                                         |
|                             | (7.90)                                                                                        | (0.93)                                                                                        |
| R 2                         | .57                                                                                           | .77                                                                                           |
| Counties                    | 92                                                                                            | 158                                                                                           |

Note: All regression are weighted by the number of farms in the county and are estimated by OLS; absolute values of /-statistics  are  in parentheses.

Source: 250-county  sample.

Mississippi  River  Delta  region  consists  of  23  counties  in  Mississippi, Arkansas,  and  Louisiana,  all  completely  contained  in  the  Mississippi River bottom. It is safe to assume that census-classified  "tenant  farms" in this region  were  on  plantations  and  that  "owned  farms"  were  wage systems on plantations. Very few farms were single units. An estimation of  the  determinants  of  the  percent  of farms  above  259 acres  using  the Delta  sample  yields  a coefficient  on average  share  tenancy  of  -0.0011 and a /-statistic  of  -3.14. 30

## ANNUAL  LABOR  CONTRACTS  AND  HARVEST  MECHANIZATION

The incentive to use annual labor contracts to secure plantation labor persisted well into the era of the mechanical cotton picker. After  World

30 See Whatley,  "A  History of Mechanization  in the Cotton  South,"  p.  1206.

War  II  the  mechanical  cotton  picker  virtually  eliminated  the  harvest labor  peak, but  about  fifteen  hands  per  acre  were  still  needed for weeding  and  hoeing,  two  preharvest  operations  the  tractor  did  not mechanize.  Before  the  mechanical  harvester  was  available  landlords were concerned about finding enough laborers for the harvest. After the mechanical harvester became available landlords were concerned about finding enough  laborers  for  weeding  and  hoeing.  In  their  classic  1954 study, The Cotton Plantation in Transition, Harald Pedersen and Arthur Raper  echo  prewar  statements  almost  verbatim,  except  now  the  word weeding  replaces  the  word  harvest:

Currently  management  on Tractor  Plantation  is willing to pay  the additional  cost of the sharecropper program in order to retain the labor force for work when needed on the operators cotton. The decision to retain a sharecropper arrangement on a portion of the plantation is made not so much in terms of the economy of the operation as it is in terms of the availability of labor. The operator of a mechanized plantation  who does not have an  accessible  labor  supply  must  depend  upon  the  availability  of  sufficient  workers  in nearby  towns  and  villages.  When  he competes  for  this  non-resident  labor  the  cost  of weed control becomes high on a per-day basis, but the critical problem is that he is never really  sure on any given day or in any given week that he will be able to obtain the 100 or 200 workers  which he  needs if he is to get through  the field  in the time available. 31

Even  though  use  of  annual  labor  contracts  continued  after  the  war because of the weeding problem, their adverse impact on mechanization was nonetheless  weakened  by the advent  of the mechanical  harvester. Before  the  harvester  was available tractor  adoption  had  little effect  on the allocation  of land between the two labor systems because it did not reduce the dominant  labor peak.  When the harvester became  available after the  war  circumstances  changed.  In  fact,  when  the  tractor  was adopted along with the harvester (as it almost always  was), the peak-load  number  of hands  was cut in half-reduced  from  the  harvest peak  of  approximately  30 hands  per  acre  to  the  remaining  preharvest peak of about  15. With the maximum labor peak now 50 percent  lower, landlords wanted  to hold approximately half as many tenants on annual contract.  Unmechanizable  land  was  released  from  the  tenant  system and  augmented  the  amount  of mechanizable  land  in the wage  system.

The availability  of  machinery  after  the  war  that  permitted  complete mechanization helps explain  why  a  recent study by  Musoke  and Olmstead finds that  the South lagged  only five to thirteen  years  behind California  in  the  use  of  mechanical  pickers  in  the  late  1940s. 32 They argue  that  some  of  the  observed  lag was  due  to  environmental  factors (climate, different  yields, different  weeding problems, and so on) so that only  a  part  of  the  lag  could  be  attributed  to  "southern  institutions,"

however defined.  In part this is because the adverse effects  of  southern agrarian institutions on mechanization were much weaker after the war. The tractor had been available since the mid-1920s, and when the picker became  available  after  World  War  II  producers  could  proceed  with complete mechanization.  Simultaneous adoption  of the tractor  and  the picker  reduced  all  the  major  labor  peaks,  leaving  only  the  relatively minor  weeding  and  hoeing  peak  as  an  incentive  to  use  annual  labor contracts. 33

Another  recent  study  of  cotton  harvest  mechanization,  by  Willis Peterson  and  Yoav  Kislev,  concludes  that 79 percent  of the  decline in annual  cotton  harvest  labor  employed  in the  South  between  1930 and 1964 was  "pulled"  out by the lure of employment  and higher wages in the manufacturing  sector.  This leaves only 21 percent of the decline to be  explained by  "push"  factors like mechanization  and  calls  into question  the  traditional view  that  southerners  were  pushed  off  the land. 34 The  model  on  which  these  conclusions  are  based  is  a  simple model  of  supply  and  demand  for  harvest  labor  as  a  function  of  the harvest wage. Shifts in the supply of labor curve are taken to summarize pull  factors, and  shifts in  the  labor  demand  curve  summarize  push factors.

My findings suggest that Peterson and Kislev may have  misspecified the labor-supply function  and overestimated  the impact of pull factors. Some portion of the decline in employment they attribute to pull factors can  be  traced  to  push  factors  like  preharvest  mechanization  because much of the decline in southern agricultural employment  between  1930 and  1964 did  not  result  from  marginal  reallocations  of  time  between cotton  and  factory work.  Much  of  it  involved  the  outmigration  of people,  and  migration  is  a function  of total  income  opportunities,  not just the harvest wage. 35 Thus, the supply of cotton harvest labor during the period was not a simple function  of the harvest wage, but of harvest plus  preharvest  labor  income  earned.  The  tractor  reduced  preharvest employment,  which reduced  annual labor income for  large numbers of rural workers between  1930 and  1964 and forced  many of them to leave the rural South. This caused a decline in the supply of harvest laborers-one  that  cannot  possibly  be attributed  to pull  factors.

The  impact  of  annual  labor  contracts  on  mechanization  also  helps explain the process of tractor adoption in the postwar South. Alston has

shown that between  1930 and  1960 there was a strong inverse  relationship between tractor use and tenancy in the same counties studied here. The  insertion  of  a  time  dummy  substantially  reduced  the  size  and significance of this relationship  for  every year  except 1940. 36 The perspective developed  here suggests that the time trend is capturing the diffusion  of  the  mechanical  cotton  picker  in  the  postwar  period  which allowed  complete  mechanization  to  proceed  and  undermined  most  of the old  institutional impediments  that  restricted tractor use  in  the prewar  period.  The  major  determinants  of tractor  adoption  during  the Great Depression were unemployment and the Agricultural  Adjustment Acts, and this explains why the time dummy does not capture much for that  decade. 37

## ANNUAL  LABOR  CONTRACTS AND TECHNOLOGICAL  INNOVATION

Perhaps the most costly impediment to technological progress erected by the widespread use of annual labor contracts was the one that choked off  the  incentive  to  invent  new  technologies.  Annual  labor  contracts may  have  helped  lengthen  the  hiatus  between  the  first  patent  on  the mechanical cotton  picking principle in  1850 and the commercial  advent of  the  International  Harvester  machine  in  1942. Conventional  wisdom holds that  it was  very  difficult  to  mechanize  the  picking  motion  of  the fingers.  This  supply-side  explanation  for  the  92-year  interim  is  even accepted by some  who  argue  that  the  tenant plantation retarded adoption of existing techniques like the tractor. 38 But the  supply-driven explanation may not be the whole story. The demand side should also be considered,  where  the  intensity  of  innovative  activity  is  tied  to  the perceived  profitability  of  the solution,  and  where  southern  institutions may have played  a role.

For  example,  the  cotton  picker  saved  more  labor  hours  than  the tractor,  and  the  harvest  peak  was  higher  than  the  preharvest  peak.  A priori  one  might  expect  the  picker  to  have  been  a  more profitable technological  breakthrough  than the tractor,  and the picker problem to have attracted inventors and their resources first. But the picker did not precede  the  tractor.  Some  of the  delay  may  have  been  supply-driven, but  part  of  it  may  have  been  caused  by  the  adverse  effects southern labor contracts had on profit signals. The  picker  was  a  machine demanded  by southerners  only, and the southern constraints  on partial mechanization  may have made it difficult  for the picker to find a market on its own. The tractor, in contrast, was in demand throughout most of

the  farming  world  because  it  mechanized  universal  farming  activities like  plowing,  harrowing,  and  disking.  Its  general  utility  helps  explain why the tractor  problem  was  attacked  first.  Once  available,  however, the  tractor should  have  increased  the  profitability of  developing  a mechanical picker. A picker in conjunction  with a tractor would  permit complete mechanization to proceed, and complete mechanization  faced far  fewer  institutional  impediments  than  partial  mechanization.

Minutes  of  New  Works  Committee  meetings  at  the  International Harvester  Company  between  1906  and  1932 are  consistent  with  this hypothesis. They suggest that the International Harvester Company had little interest  in solving the picker problem until the all-purpose  tractor was perfected  in  1922. Once the tractor  was marketed  an all-out  effort was launched to develop a mechanical picker. The story at International Harvester  is  of  great  interest  because  the  company  was  the  largest farm-implement  maker in the world and because  the company  was the first  to  develop  commercially  successful  versions  of  the  all-purpose tractor  and  the  cotton  picker.

As  early  as  1906 the  Experimental  Department  at  the  International Harvester Company began receiving letters from  small inventors  trying to get the company's Patent Department interested  in their prototypes. But  the  New  Works  Committee,  which  oversaw experimentation, recommended  the company  do nothing but  "follow  closely  the  cotton pickers  of  the  spindle  type." 39 On  April  1,  1907,  the  New  Works Committee  again  recommended  that  "the  time  was  not  ripe  to  do anything with  the  cotton  picker  except  keep our  eyes  open  and  watch sharply  to  see  what  is  accomplished." 40 And  again  on  November  26, 1907:

The  subject  was  brought  before  the  committee  by  application  of  Angus  Campbell (who has worked for many years on the cotton picker) to engage with the  International Company  in  the  development  of  a  picker.  It  was thought,  however,  not  desirable  to make such  an arrangement, -that the International  should  not endeavor  to develop a picker but  should  watch  the progress  made by others. 41

By  1912 Angus  Campbell  had  left  International  Harvester  and  built the Price-Campbell  machine  with Theodore  Price. 42 International  Harvester  would  not  touch  the  picker  for  another  twelve  years.  In  the interim, however, they would outline and authorize a program designed to  keep  the  company  a  leader  in  the  tractor  industry.  By  1922  the

all-purpose Farmall tractor was successfully  developed, and on July 13, Cyrus McCormick, Jr.  reported  that:

At  the  Directors  Meeting  last  Friday  the  most  important  item  passed  upon  was an appropriation  for  $1,000,000 for  necessary  building and  equipment  at our  Tractor  and Milwaukee  Works  for  the  manufacture  of  the  new 10/20  and 15/30  tractors,  the expenditure  of this sum to be subject  to the approval of the executive committee. This action is co-incident  with the  present expansion  plans in our tractor  program  whereby we expect to manufacture  seventy-five of the 10/20 and fifty of the 15/30 tractors a day. 43

Less  than  two  years  later International  Harvester  bought  the PriceCampbell patent on the same prototype they had rejected in 1907. 44 The company  immediately  realized  the  machine  needed  a lot  of  work  and promptly  began  solving  many  of  its  problems.  Realizing  the  machine was  too expensive, engineers quickly tested a successful smaller version.  Cyrus McCormick, Jr. himself was present at the New Works Committee meeting on October 22,  1924, and moved to "proceed  with a  horse,  or  tractor  drawn  ground  driven  machine  with  two  picking cylinders, as  rapidly  as possible." 45

By 1928 at least four kinds of pickers and four kinds of strippers were being tested  and  refined,  "and  as  near  as  could  be  determined  practically  all  of  the serious  troubles  had  been  overcome." 46 Continued refinements  were so successful  that in 1930 the New Works Committee launched  an  "unlimited  program"  covering  all Farmall  tractor  attachment  and  self-propelled  type  machine.  The  Price-Campbell  prototype that  spawned  all  of  this  testing,  learning,  and  development  was  now officially  "abandoned"  and the Engineering Department was authorized to  "do  whatever  is necessary"  to develop  a commercial  picker. 47

A  year  later  the  New  Works  Subcommittee  Report  on  the  Cotton Picker was so positive about the new, refined,  and mechanically  simple machine  that  the  chairman  of  the  committee  and  an  experimental engineer  presented  cost  data.  A  one-row  picker  would  cost  a  farmer between  $700  and  $800  and  a  two-row  machine  between  $1400  and $1600. A cotton-cleaner  attachment  added  $300. The report  also noted that  the  "cost  of  operation  of a two-row  machine  with  suitable  charge for tractor and for repairs and depreciation and including men to pick up last  unpicked  or  scattered  5% of crop is $4 to  $6 per bale, .  .  ." 48

In  1932 the  Experimental  Department  thought  they  had  solved  most of the engineering problems and recommended that one to three of these machines  be  produced  for  sale.  But  after considering  the current

- 43 McCormick  Collection, Cyrus H.  McCormick, Jr. Papers, Series  4C,  Box  11, vol.  101, p. 493.
- ' " " N e w Works  Reports,"  meeting  no.  604,  Oct.  22,  1924.
- 45 Ibid.,  emphasis added.
- 4 6 I b i d . , meeting  no.  680,  Mar.  29,  1928.
- 47 Ibid., meeting  no.  704,  Apr.  4,  1930.  On the success  of the  experiments  of  1928  see ibid., meeting  no.  694,  Mar.  14, 1929.
- 48 Ibid.,  subreport  no.  388,  Mar.  25,  1931.

economic  conditions  the  Manufacturing  and  Sales  departments  overrode  the  suggestion. 49 The  reason  is  apparent.  At  average  wages  for picking cotton between  1930 and 1940, the two-row machine would only be profitable at scales of production greater than  170  bales of lint cotton, well  beyond  the  capacity  of  most  producers. 50 The  committee  did  not report  operation  costs  for  the  one-row  machine,  but  if  there  were  no economies  of  scale,  profitable  adoption  of  the  smaller  machine  would have required  more than 85 bales of output,  still a very  large  sum.

International Harvester eventually marketed its first twelve machines in  1942, usually considered  the date International  Harvester  solved  the technical  problems.  But  if  International  Harvester  had  developed  an interest in the machine  back  in 1907  when  Angus  Campbell  first approached  the  New  Works  Committee,  then  the  eight  years  it  took their engineers to develop the machine of  1931 might have yielded  one by  1915-if not  by  1915, then  certainly  by  1925. There  is  no  evidence that  major  new  technological  knowhow  became  available  in the  1920s that made a breakthrough more likely. The primary problem appears to have been funds to support experimentation. Most of the improvements made  by  International  Harvester  concerned  the  correct  placement  of drums and rotating spindles that would remove only opened  bolls  from the cotton plant. 51 The  search for  the right combination  involved  much trial  and  error  because  cotton  harvest  conditions  varied  considerably from  place  to  place  and  a commercially  successful  machine  had  to  be both  fine-tuned  and  flexible.  Trials  had  to  be  conducted  under  actual harvest  conditions,  and  engineers  were  restricted  to  one  set  of experiments  per  year.  The  International  Harvester  strategy  was  to  send caravans of prototypes into the field each harvest and to test them under varying real conditions. Engineers had a year to solve problems  before the next round of experiments began. There is no doubt that the rounds that occurred in the  late 1920s  and  early 1930s  could have  been conducted  earlier.  The  most  probable  constraint  was  not  technical knowhow  but  the  capital  expenditures  needed  to  build  and  support enough prototypes  to make the annual experiments  worthwhile.  International  Harvester  had  the  resources; Price-Campbell  did  not.

Had  International  Harvester  developed  an  interest  in  the  machine early enough to give its engineers time to solve the problem before  the Depression,  the  outcome  might  have  been  very  different.  At  average

30 This  calculation  assumes  a  $1500  machine  with  operating  costs  of $5  for a  500-pound bale. Picking  wages  are  for  Mississippi  and  are  taken  from  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture,  "Crops  and Markets,"  19 (May  1942). The  average  1930-1940  wage  for  picking  100 pounds  of seed  cotton  was $0.51.  The USDA  uses  a  35 percent  factor  to transform seed  cotton  into  lint  cotton.  See U.S. Department  of Agriculture,  Bureau  of Agricultural  Statistics,  "Statistics  on Cotton  and Related Data,"  Statistical  Bulletin  N o .  99 (June  1951). This  yields a cost  of $7.29 to hand-pick  a bale of lint cotton.  The  calculation  also  assumes  a 6 percent  interest  rate  and  a ten-year  service  life.

31

Street,

The New  Revolution,

pp.

107-29.

cotton picking rates for 1925 to 1930, the two-row machine would have been profitable at scales of production as small as 34.5 bales, well within the reach of many plantations and farms. 52 With the Farmall tractor also available  after  1925 there  is every  reason  to believe  that  a mechanical harvester could have been successfully  marketed and used two decades before  the end of the  Second  World  War. But as long as the invention of the cotton  picker had to wait for the invention of the tractor,  annual labor  contracts  would  endure  as a low-cost  arrangement  for  securing harvest labor-an  arrangement  which, in turn, contributed  to a history of technological  backwardness  in the Cotton  South. 53

## Appendix

The mule and tractor  technologies  used  to construct  Figure  1 are listed  in Table 8. They were constructed  with the aid of two studies on cotton production practices that contain extensive discussions  of  operations  and  techniques:  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture,  "Farming Practices in the Cultivation of Cotton,"  Technical  Bulletin No. 511 (Mar. 1917); and The National  Research  Project,  "Changes  in Technology and Labor  Requirements  in  Crop  Production:  Cotton,"  Report  No. A-7 (Sept.  1938). Performance  rate estimates were collected for each cell from  the published results of a

TABLE  8 COTTON PRODUCTION  TECHNOLOGIES  AND LABOR HOURS PER ACRE: DELTA REGION,  1930

|              | Mule                       | Mule        | Tractor                       | Tractor     |
|--------------|----------------------------|-------------|-------------------------------|-------------|
| Operation    | Implements                 | Labor Hours | Implements                    | Labor Hours |
| Cut  stalks  | 0 mules,  hand             | 3.0         |                               |             |
| Plow         | mule, 7"-8" plow           | 7.5         | tractor,  7"-8" disk          | 1.02        |
| Harrow       | mule,  1-row  harrow       | 1.5         | tractor,  1 1 " - 14"  harrow | 0.413       |
| Bed          | mule, 7"-8" plow           | 3.3         | tractor,  2-row  middlebuster | 0.714       |
| Fertilize    | mule,  1-row  applicator   | 1.53        | tractor,  tractor  applicator | 0.302       |
| Plant        | mule,  1-row  planter      | 1.58        | tractor,  4-row  planter      | 0.363       |
| Cultivate    | mule,  '/2-row  cultivator | 3.22        | tractor,  4-row  cultivator   | 0.320       |
| Hoe and chop | hoe                        | 11.0        | hoe                           | 11.00       |

Note: Cotton  production  normally  requires  8 cultivations  and  3 hoeings.

Source: U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  "Utilization  and  Cost  of  Power  on  Mississippi  and Arkansas Delta Plantations," Technical Bulletin No. 496 (Dec. 1935). Estimates for labor hours per acre  per  time  over  in  the  chopping  and hoeing operations  are taken  from  Arkansas  Experimental Station, "Combinations  of  Enterprises  on  Plantations  in  the  Lower  Arkansas  River  Delta," Bulletin  No.  449 (June  1944).  Similar estimates  are  reported  in  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, "Plantation  Organization  and Operation in the Yazoo-Mississippi  Delta Area," Technical  Bulletin No.  682 (May  1939).

32 See  fn. 50.  The average picking  wage  for 1925-1930  was  $1.14.  The  average  cost  of hand-picking  a bale was $16.29.

53 A similar kind of result is found  in Gavin Wright and Howard  Kunreuther,  "Cotton, Corn and Risk in the Nineteenth  Century,"  this JOURNAL,  35 (Sept.  1975), pp. 526-51; and  Roger  Ransom and Richard  Sutch,  "The  'Lock-in'  Mechanism and  Overproduction  of Cotton  in the  Postbellum South," Agricultural  History, 49 (Apr.  1975), pp. 405-25.

## LABOR AND POWER REQUIREMENTS  BY MONTH FOR OPERATIONS  IN COTTON  PRODUCTION

1944).

TABLE  9

| Chop and  Hoe Third        | 7% 70 23 21% 74 5                          |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Second                     |                                            |
| First                      | 7% 56 37                                   |
| Second Other               | 17% 35 43 5                                |
| Cultivate                  | 19% 54 27                                  |
| Disk  or Harrow and  Plant | 3% 61 34 2                                 |
| Rebreak                    | 7% 16 55 22                                |
| Distribute                 |                                            |
|                            | 25 12                                      |
|                            | 9 6                                        |
| Month                      | March September December                   |
|                            | November                                   |
|                            | January April May June July August October |
|                            | 18                                         |
| Fertilizer                 | 51                                         |
|                            | 12%                                        |
| Break                      |                                            |
|                            | 9                                          |
|                            | 27% 31                                     |
|                            | February                                   |

1930  survey  of 161  plantations  in  the  Delta in U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, "Utilization  and  Cost  of  Power  on Mississippi  and  Arkansas  Plantations,"  Technical Bulletin  No.  497  (Dec.  1935).  Records  were  obtained  from  plantations  showing  the hourly rate of work (in acres completed) for each operation. Estimates were reported for those  power  units  and  operations  that  were  performed  on  a  "sufficient number  of plantations to give a reliable average" (p. 18). The per acre labor requirements for each operation  are the  reciprocals  of the reported  performance  rates.

The estimate for  harvest  labor hours per acre is based on an estimated  yield  of 1000 pounds of seed cotton per acre. The U.S. Department of Agriculture uses a 35 percent factor to transform  seed cotton into lint cotton. This is corroborated by direct quotations found  in various  U.S. Department of Agriculture and agricultural  experimental  station reports and is adopted here. A thousand pounds of seed cotton yields 350 pounds of lint and  is a good approximation  of per acre yields in the Delta.

An average picking rate of 125 pounds of seed cotton per 10-hour man-day is the quote found  most  frequently.  For  a  representative  sample  see U.S.  Department  of Agriculture,  "Plantation  Organization,"  p. 58; National Research Project,  "Changes in Labor and Technology," p. 50; and U.S. Department of Agriculture, "Labor Requirements of Arkansas Crops," Bulletin No.  1181 (Mar.  1924). Applying this rate to the estimated per acre  yield  produces  an  estimate  of 80 hours  per acre for  harvesting.

The labor-hour estimates for each task are distributed over the 12 months by applying the  percentage  factors  listed  in  Table  9.  They  are  taken  from  Arkansas  Agricultural Experimental Station, "Combination of  Enterprises on  Plantations  in  the Lower Arkansas River Delta,"  Bulletin  No. 449 (Mar.  1944). After  time distributing the labor hours per acre for each task the total labor for each month is calculated. The results are reported  in Figure  1.