## The Transformation of the Canadian Domestic Servant, 1871-1931

This article uses the national sample of the 1901 census of Canada to compare the earnings of live-in domestic servants with the earnings of women in other occupations and to examine the ethnoreligious backgrounds of domestic servants. The hypothesis that domestic service o/ffered relative material advantages, when room and board are taken into account, is rejected. The hypothesis that female domestic servants came from a narrow range of speci/fic ethnoreligious backgrounds is also rejected. The changing backgrounds and expectations of female domestic servants in the early twentieth century exacerbated class tensions in the service sector, helping ensure that domestic service remained an occupation of short duration and high turnover. The conclusion is that domestic service did not simply decline; rather, a work process was transformed. Demographic changes combined with changes in family and individual strategies to limit the supply of labor. When e/fforts to increase labor supply failed, bourgeois employers attempted to replace labor with new household technology; the wage-paid occupation of the domestic servant declined and was replaced by that of the unpaid housewife.

'I'd rather pick rags and keep my self-respect!' Such was the reaction of one Canadian woman who faced the prospect of becoming a domestic servant in the early twentieth century (Salverson 1981 [1939]: 319). The Canadian literature on the history of domestic servants could easily lead to the conclusion that Laura Goodman Salverson was speaking for most young women of her generation. Of course, there were real and anticipated bene/fits from being 'in service,' particularly for young immigrants, for whom domestic service was an obvious path of entry into Canada and its labor markets. In

Social Science History 31:4 (Winter 2007) DOI 10.1215/01455532-2007-007 © 2007 by Social Science History Association

1901,  38  percent  of  all  women  with  paid  labor occupations  were  servants, and  the  occupation  attracted  more women  than  the  entire  manufacturing sector. While  acknowledging  the  anticipated  bene/fits, Canadian  historians have tended to emphasize the many disadvantages of the occupation from the employee's perspective. Employers wanted to hire 'respectable' British women but often failed to /find them and were forced to turn to eastern European immigrants, of whom they were highly suspicious (Barber 1980, 1984, 1991; Lindstrom-Best 1988). Whether immigrant or Canadian-born, young women found themselves in an occupation that entailed long hours, lack of freedom, loneliness, and vulnerability to exploitation and abuse. Ethnic and religious prejudices exacerbated tensions between bourgeois employers and the  working-class stranger in their homes (Lenskyj 1981). Bourgeois conceptions of class encouraged an association of domestic servants with criminality, especially theft and prostitution (McLean and Barber 2004). Despite the ostensible respectability of employment in a bourgeois home, the stigma of inferiority was inescapable (Fahrni 1997). Canadian historians have given us plenty of evidence to show why domestic service was an occupation of short duration and high turnover rates. Here was a job that quickly repelled most who entered it.

Domestic service has a distinct place in the history of work in capitalist societies: an occupation strongly associated with women in nineteenthcentury Europe and North America, it was one of the few female-dominated occupations that declined in the twentieth century. On the question of longterm decline, the Canadian and international literatures rarely engage each other. For Canadian researchers, long-term decline is not a primary focus, perhaps  because  the  causes  are  obvious.  Only  those  who  had  no  choice entered  domestic  service;  those  who  had  a  choice,  according  to  Marilyn Barber (1991: 8), preferred work in factories, o/ffices, or shops, even though wages in service were comparable. In the /first half of the twentieth century, a  changing  economic structure meant that more young women, including immigrant women, could act on their preferences. The demand for workers remained strong; the occupation declined, therefore, because of a failure of labor supply.

American and British researchers focus more extensively on the longterm decline than Canadian historians and are more explicit about the relative importance of wages and noneconomic factors in causing that decline. Research on the United States suggests that servants' earnings compared

favorably with the earnings of other unskilled or semiskilled workers in the late nineteenth century, especially since room and board were provided; that any discontent among servants was not related to wage levels; and that even when  servants'  earnings  were  higher  than  earnings  in  other  occupations, women shunned domestic service for noneconomic reasons (Katzman 1978: 303-14;  Sutherland  1981:  109-10;  Lasser  1987).  For  England,  Teresa  M. McBride (1976: 64) concludes that domestic service had a distinct monetary advantage over other occupations for women in the nineteenth century; that servants were doing comparatively well even in the early twentieth century; and that despite relatively good earnings, the long-term decline began after the peak in employment in 1891 (see also Schwarz 1999). These conclusions imply something very important about the collective choices of large numbers of women: noneconomic factors, including calculations related to status, independence, and the nature of employer-employee relations, took priority over material self-interest.

Is it so clear, however, that women who shunned domestic service were sacri/ficing material advantage? Estimating the real earnings of domestic servants is extremely di/fficult, and even where evidence is abundant, historians acknowledge problems of data quality and representativeness (Katzman 1978: 298-302; Sutherland 1981: 108). Fortunately, recently released Canadian sources allow us to revisit the history of domestic service and to o/ffer new evidence on the earnings and backgrounds of domestic servants. The decennial census was the only systematic attempt to identify and record all domestic servants in the country and to locate them in the context of their households. We no longer need to rely on the aggregated information in published census tables, although those tables remain useful in plotting longterm trends. Census microdata-the individual-level information collected by enumerators-are available  in  computerized  national  samples  for  1871 and  1901  (Darroch  and  Ornstein  2000;  Canadian  Families  Project  2002). Also available in machine-readable format from the North Atlantic Population Project and Minnesota Population Center (2004) is the entire population of Canada as enumerated in 1881, thanks to the work of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Canadian microdata are potentially powerful sources: Canadian enumerators, unlike their U.S. counterparts, asked a question about religious a/ffiliation; beginning in 1901, the data include annual earnings for employees as well as other employment information (Baskerville and Sager 1998; Baskerville 2000; Sager 2000). This article makes particular

use of the national sample of the 1901 census and limited use of the 1871 and 1881 censuses.1

The analysis begins with two questions. First, when the movement of women away from domestic service began, how did earnings in service compare with earnings in other occupations? Second, did domestic servants come from  speci/fic  immigrant  and  ethnoreligious  backgrounds,  as  the  contemporary image of the ubiquitous Irish 'Bridget' suggests? Answers to these empirical questions lead to a wider concluding emphasis on the choices and strategies of both workers and employers in a speci/fic con/figuration of class, gender, demographic change, and technological transformation of household work. Domestic service did not simply decline; rather, a work process was transformed.

Selecting domestic servants from census microdata requires that choices be made and speci/fied, since the word servant was applied to many kinds of workers in the nineteenth century and selection criteria vary among historians.  Should the focus be on servants who were lodged and fed by their employers and performed indoor household work (McBride 1976: 11), or does one also include nonresident servants and even chambermaids who worked in hotels (Sutherland 1981: xii)? To exclude farm servants on the grounds that  they  were  agricultural  workers  risks  excluding  many  who  performed both household tasks and outdoor labor. In Canada the historian must be sensitive to varying contemporary usages in both French and English sources (Lacelle 1987: 15-17). The focus in this article is on urban domestic servants, whether resident or nonresident, who were paid for labor relating to the personal needs of household members and the maintenance of the household. Thus hotel workers, ship stewards, and farm servants are excluded; about 48 distinct occupational titles in the 1901 census are included, although the most frequent titles are domestic, servant, or domestic servant.

The published census tables are a blunt instrument, but they help us determine when the absolute and relative decline in domestic service began. Total employment in the 'domestic and personal service sector,' including men and women, grew until 1911 and then stabilized (/figure 1). After 1891 growth occurred mainly in the 'other' category, most of whom were unlikely to  be  live-in  domestic  servants,  such  as  hairdressers,  hotel  and  restaurant workers, janitors, and launderers. Between 1881 and 1921 the Canadian labor force grew by a factor of 2.3, whereas the number of male and female servants grew by a factor of 1.8; the decline in domestic service, therefore, was

Figure 1 Total male and female servants and total domestic and personal service workers (thousands), 1881-1921

<!-- image -->

Source: Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1924, 4: table 1.

relative.  As  a  proportion  of  all  paid  labor,  the  decline  in  domestic  service began in the 1890s: servants were 6.1 percent of the labor force in 1891, 5.5 percent in 1901, and 3.6 percent in 1921.2 Female domestic servants were 41 percent of all women with occupations in 1891; this proportion fell to 34 percent in 1901 and to 18 percent in 1921 (Leslie 1974: 72).

The two decades before and after 1901 appear to be a turning point in the history of domestic service in Canada. What were servants earning at this time? The earnings information in the 1901 census allows comparisons among occupations at national and local levels and for subcategories of the broad  'personal  service'  occupations.  The  earnings  information  has  the enormous advantage that it records annual earnings, thereby adjusting for periods of unemployment during the year. The Census and Statistics Bulle-

tin I: Wage Earners by Occupation (Census O/ffice 1907), which reports numbers of workers and average annual earnings for all employees in the country in 1901, suggests a national average of $272 for men in the 'domestic and personal class' and $137 for women. The subcategory 'servant' is more likely to re/flect the earnings of domestic servants: the average was $182 for 11,767 male servants and $120 for 70,541 female servants.3 These averages are below the national average for all wage earners in all occupations: $387 for men and $182 for women. Average earnings for the male servant, therefore, were around $200 below the national average for men; women domestics earned on average some $60 less than the national average for women.

Unlike other workers, domestic servants received room and board. The quality of food and accommodation must have varied considerably, but it is reasonable  to  ask  what  other  workers  were  required  to  pay  for  room  and board, for this cost was what the domestic servant faced when comparing the real value of wages in alternative occupations. Estimates of the weekly cost of board and lodging for 'workingmen' were given by the federal Department of Labour in 1900 ( Labour Gazette 1900). These estimates indicate an annual cost of $156 in Halifax, between $169 and $234 in Montreal, between $156 and $221 in Toronto, between $130 and $182 in Hamilton, and $260 in Vancouver. A lower annual cost was possible if one shared a small rented house and survived on a very modest diet: a worker might then live on between $80 and $100 a year in Halifax, Montreal, and Toronto and around $120 in Vancouver. Most workers also had to buy coal or wood for cooking and heating, and so we should add annual fuel costs ranging from $17 to $50, depending on the city.⁴ To the extent that such broad averages tell us anything, they suggest that in real terms the earnings of the female domestic servant compared  very  well  with  the  earnings  of  other  women  workers,  although  the same point cannot be made for men. Adding the costs of room, board, and fuel to the earnings of the female servant brings the real earnings well above the national average of $182 for all women employees. The earnings advantage of domestic servants was not simply that their employment included room and board; constancy of employment-10.95 months in the year, on average-was another material advantage.

Census microdata allow us to move beyond these aggregated nationallevel  estimates,  which  may  conceal  wide  variations  among  regions.  The microdata also make it possible to identify the live-in servant. In 1891 and in subsequent censuses Canadian enumerators asked about the relationship

of each person to the head of his or her household. Often the words domestic or servant appear in the 'relation to head' column, as well as other terms indicating a type of domestic service occupation. The census questions about occupation and relation to household head allow us to distinguish between live-in domestic servants and nonresident servants at the national and local levels. We  can  also  focus  on  urban  domestic  servants,  either  by  selecting urban locations  or  by excluding  the  servant  whose  household  head  was  a farmer.

The  1901  microdata  con/firm  the  general  conclusion  drawn  from  the national-level data, although with some important quali/fications.⁵ If we exclude farm servants and compare live-in domestics with nonresident domestics, we /find a surprising result. The mean earnings for women are almost identical: $129 ( N = 1,789) for live-in domestics, compared to $130 ( N = 966) for nonresident domestics. Live-in domestics had much higher real earnings, after we adjust for the food and accommodation costs of the nonresidents. This was a time when more domestic service workers were living outside the homes of their employers (Barber 1980: 151); to the extent that this trend was occurring in Canada, workers were forsaking the material advantage of 'living in.' The same point cannot be made for the minority of domestic service workers who were men: at $355 a year ( N = 779), the mean earnings of  nonresident  service workers  were  far  higher  than  those  of  live-in  male servants ($251, N = 313).

If we want to understand the choices available to workers, the best comparisons are those between wages of workers in the same locations, thereby controlling for signi/ficant di/fferences in wage levels across the country. We know that workers' earnings tended to increase with age, at least until they were in their forties (Sager 2007), and so we should also control for age. The following analysis focuses on Ontario towns having a population of 10,000 or more and selects only workers aged 16 to 28, since almost two-thirds of livein domestics in those Ontario towns were in this age range. Annual earnings in domestic service were lower than in almost all other occupational sectors; the only exception is men in general laboring (table 1).

Nevertheless, this apparent earnings gap largely disappears, except possibly for men in sales and women in typing/clerical, when we factor in the domestic workers' savings in room and board. When a single worker in a southern Ontario city paid $130 in board and lodging a year-or even $80 a  year,  assuming  shared  accommodation-domestic service clearly had an

Table 1 Mean annual earnings of workers aged 16-28 in seven Ontario towns of population at least 10,000, 1901

|                       | Earnings   | Earnings   | Earnings   | Earnings   |
|-----------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Occupation            | Men        | N          | Women      | N          |
| Live-in domestics     | $321       | 34         | $131       | 381        |
| Nonresident domestics | $315       | 75         | $129       | 110        |
| Sales                 | $418       | 108        | $201       | 57         |
| Typing/clerical       | $354       | 454        | $252       | 222        |
| Manufacturing         | $347       | 875        | $206       | 565        |
| General laboring      | $290       | 175        | $151       | 2          |
| All occupations       | $362       | 2,474      | $193       | 1,525      |

Source: Canadian Families Project 2002.

earnings advantage. And by contrast with the national-level averages, in these Ontario towns the earnings advantage of domestics applies to both women and men. Census microdata tend to con/firm the contemporary impression that live-in servants 'are really better o/ff than girls working in factories or shops so far as wages and comfort are concerned' (Scott 1892: 19).

There is more than one way to compare earnings among occupations, however. Workers in 1901 were quite capable of making comparisons by more than one measure. There are three important quali/fications to the tentative conclusion that servants had earnings advantages over other workers. Taken together, these quali/fications suggest that we cannot accept the hypothesis that women shunned domestic service regardless of material self-interest.

First, live-in domestic servants appear to have earned a relatively small wage premium for age and experience. This was an occupation for young people in their teens and twenties; the majority left the occupation in their twenties or thirties either for another occupation or at the point of marriage. Young domestic servants who were aware of the earnings of their older colleagues would have concluded that signi/ficant wage increases were unlikely. In Ontario towns the mean earnings of women domestics in their late twenties were actually less than the mean earnings of women domestics in their late teens (/figure 2). T o increase one's chances of a wage increase, one had to be among the minority of women who remained in domestic service into one's thirties. Wage increases between the early and late twenties were much more likely to be won by young women in manufacturing or in clerical and sales work. If a woman stayed in the labor force into her late twenties, it made

Figure 2 Annual earnings of female live-in domestics, female employees in manufacturing, and female employees in clerical or sales occupations, Ontario towns of population at least 5,000, 1901

<!-- image -->

Age

Source: Canadian Families Project 2002.

Note: Number of cases given in chart.

good economic sense to move out of domestic service and into clerical work or even into certain factory occupations, where the range in wage levels and the premium for experience were particularly large. An even better alternative, if one had the modest education requirements, was to become a schoolteacher at an average annual salary of $299. Even allowing for the costs of room and board, most women in the clerical, sales, and education sectors were earning more in real terms than domestic servants.

Table 2 Mean annual earnings of women domestic workers (resident and nonresident) in urban Ontario, 1901

| Occupation       |   Mean |   Standard  deviation |   N |
|------------------|--------|-----------------------|-----|
| Cook             |    156 |                  91.2 |  58 |
| Housekeeper      |    152 |                  86.6 |  45 |
| Maid/housemaid   |    147 |                  81.1 |  45 |
| General servant  |    137 |                 131.8 | 399 |
| Waitress         |    131 |                  49.5 |  28 |
| Charwoman        |    130 |                  59.6 |  12 |
| Domestic servant |    125 |                  72.3 | 345 |

Source: Canadian Families Project 2002.

Second, although there existed a hierarchy among servants, it was not complex  in  a  country  where  the  single-servant  household  was  the  norm. Opportunities for upward mobility in domestic service scarcely existed. In England and the United States the housekeeper in a large household was an administrator, the female manager of the household sta/ff (Horn 1975: 5357; Sutherland 1981: 88-89). Such housekeepers existed in Canada but were rare: only about 3,000 in the entire country, according to the Census Bulletin , and only a minority of these were employed in multiservant households. The traditional  English  butler,  master of  the  large  English  household,  appears to have been rare in Canada. Table 2 shows how narrow the earnings hierarchy was in the female domestic service workforce in Ontario towns of 1,000 people or more. There may have been rewards for experience and loyalty in these servant categories-some of the standard deviations are high-but the number of job categories was small, and there seems to have been little advantage to movement between jobs. In domestic service the opportunity for promotion was rare, and gains were meager.

Third and most important, it  appears  that  the  earnings  advantage  of domestic servants  in  1901  was  not  maintained  in  the  early decades  of  the twentieth century. We might expect wages to rise as the gap between supply and demand became more apparent. In 1892 Jean Thomson Scott (1892: 19) believed that 'the supply of domestics is rather short of the demand; and, as a consequence, their wages have risen considerably.' Whatever the case in 1892, in the /first decades of the twentieth century the law of supply and demand seems to have been suspended. Despite their complaints about a

Table 3 Women's annual earnings

|   Year |   All occupations  (current $) |   1900 $ |   Personal  service  (current $) |   1900 $ |   Personal service/ all occupations  x 100 |
|--------|--------------------------------|----------|----------------------------------|----------|--------------------------------------------|
|   1901 |                            182 |      182 |                              137 |      137 |                                       75.3 |
|   1921 |                            573 |      254 |                              326 |      144 |                                       56.9 |
|   1931 |                            559 |      319 |                              296 |      169 |                                       53   |

Sources: For 1921 and 1931, Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1933: tables 15-16; for 1901, Census O/ffice 1907.

Note: The adjustment to constant dollars uses the price index in Altman 1992: 458-59.

shortage of servants, employers were not willing to attract workers into the occupation by the most obvious means available-the o/ffer of competitive wages. Our evidence on this point is necessarily tentative, since we must rely on the published census tables; nevertheless, the tentative conclusion is a strong one, since all the evidence points in one direction.

Average  annual  earnings  for  all  women  with  occupations  increased before falling with the onset of the depression of the 1930s. But the earnings of women in domestic and personal service did not keep pace. Looking /first at the broad category of domestic and personal service, we see the earnings of service workers at 75 percent of the national average for women in 1901; by 1921 service workers earned, on average, only 57 percent of the average for all women (table 3). In constant dollars, the gain in real earnings by service workers was negligible or nonexistent between 1901 and 1921. We must await the release of post-1901 census microdata from the Canadian Century Research Infrastructure Project before we can focus on live-in domestic servants. Nevertheless, the 1931 census volume on earnings gives national- and provincial-level  information  on  the  category  'domestic  servant'  for  both 1921 and 1931; live-in domestic servants fall in this category, and it would require a highly improbable distribution of earnings in the category for the trend  not  to  apply  to  live-in  domestics. The  census  estimates  of  average annual earnings for domestic servants suggest that by 1921 domestic servants earned only 49 percent of the national average for women; in 1901 they had earned 66 percent of the national average. For domestic servants, there had been little if any increase in real earnings, adjusting for in/flation, since 1901.

The earnings of women servants had increased by 236 percent, and the cost

Table 4 Average weekly and annual earnings of women in selected occupations, 1921

| Occupation                |   Weekly earnings |   Annual earnings |
|---------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Domestic servants         |              5.82 |               284 |
| Charwoman                 |              7.95 |               374 |
| Cooks                     |              9.43 |               460 |
| Hairdressers, manicurists |             14.58 |               688 |
| Matrons, housekeepers     |              6.99 |               350 |
| Waitresses                |              9.18 |               426 |
| Saleswomen                |             11.91 |               575 |
| Teachers                  |             16.41 |               827 |
| Telegraph operators       |             18.46 |               899 |
| Telephone operators       |             13.47 |               660 |
| Operatives: boots, shoes  |             10.64 |               468 |
| Knitters                  |             10.83 |               498 |
| Weavers                   |             11.91 |               538 |
| Spinners                  |             10.3  |               468 |
| Milliners                 |             12.83 |               583 |

Source: Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1933: tables 20, 22.

Note: Annual earnings are calculated by multiplying average weekly earnings by average weeks worked.

of living had risen by an estimated 226 percent (Altman 1992); by contrast, the mean earnings of all women workers had increased by 315 percent. An unprecedented earnings gap had opened up between domestic servants and other workers, including even women in other service occupations (table 4). In 1921 it was much less likely that the room and board of live-in domestics could compensate for the disparity with the earnings of other workers, since the real earnings of domestic servants had not increased over the previous 20 years.

Young women workers now had both material and other reasons to seek work outside domestic service. In explaining the decline of this occupation, we cannot reduce the choices of women workers to simple calculations of relative  material  advantage,  important  as  these  may  have  been.  There  is always an interaction between earnings and other conditions of work in the class  relations  between  workers  and  employers. The  status  of  the  domestic servant was already low; the growing wage gap with other occupations would have reinforced the status gap. And what do we know about the young people who had to choose among occupations in this period? Any change in the backgrounds and identities of employees would interact with the status

of  the  occupation and with workers' estimation of its advantages and disadvantages. Census microdata reveal that there were important changes in the pro/file of domestic servants in the last decades of the nineteenth century: the servants of 1901 were not the same as the servants of 1871 and 1881.

There is plenty of evidence in the secondary literature to suggest that domestic servants were vulnerable to exploitation: they were young and predominantly female, and many were recent immigrants, struggling to /find a place in new and unfamiliar labor markets. At /first glance, census data con/firm  the  demographic pro/file. In 1901, 85 percent of live-in domestic servants, excluding farm servants, were women, and almost two-thirds of these women were aged 25 or less. The regional exception was British Columbia: in Victoria, for instance, 60 percent of live-in domestics were men, many of them Asian immigrants.⁶ Nonresident servants di/ffered from their live-in contemporaries: they were almost as likely to be male as female, and they were older workers, not callow youngsters-the majority of both men and women were aged over 25. We may infer that the employer's relationships with the nonresident servant and the live-in domestic were very di/fferent. The older service worker with a separate residence was less vulnerable to the oppressive paternalism and lack of freedom endured by the live-in domestic.

But was the live-in servant a young Irish woman, recently arrived in a  strange  land?  Recent  Canadian  work  on  immigration  and  ethnicity  has taught us to be skeptical of inferences based on contemporary stereotyping. Ethnicity was a key marker of identity, but the 'vertical mosaic' hypothesis, the idea that there was a strong association between immigrants or ethnicity and occupational structure, has undergone extensive revision (Darroch and Ornstein 1980; Darroch and Soltow 1991; Sager and Morier 2002). By 1901 the  domestic  servant  was  seldom  an  immigrant  and  seldom  Irish.  If  you employed a live-in domestic servant in 1901, the odds were almost four to one that you employed a Canadian-born worker. Immigrants were only slightly overrepresented  among  domestic  servants,  given  their  share  of  the  labor force. Despite the received image of domestics as immigrants, by 1901 live-in domestic servants were less likely to be /first-generation immigrants than their employers: only 22 percent of female live-in domestics were /first-generation immigrants, but 25 percent of the heads of households with a live-in servant were immigrants. The di/fference is in part a simple re/flection of the younger age pro/file of servants, who came from a generation that included proportionally fewer immigrants than that of their older employers. T wo decades

earlier, according to the 1881 census, the proportion of immigrants among urban domestic servants was slightly higher, at 30 percent, and only 15 percent of servants were Irish-born (North Atlantic Population Project 2004).⁷ In 1871, however, employers depended much more on immigrants: 42 percent of urban domestic servants were born outside Canada, according to the national sample of the 1871 census, and in some cities, including Toronto, the proportion of immigrants was even higher (Lacelle 1987: 73, 76).⁸

The census question on 'racial or tribal origin' allows us to say something  about  the  ethnicity  of  individuals.  In  1901,  although  Irish  Catholic women were overrepresented, Irish Protestants were underrepresented in this occupation; as a whole, Irish-origin women were not overrepresented: they were 22 percent of all women in the labor force and 22 percent of female live-in  domestics.  Overrepresented,  by  comparison  to  their  share  of  the labor force, were the English, accounting for 29 percent of all female live-in domestics, and Asians, although there were very few of the latter. Apart from Germans and Icelanders, Europeans were underrepresented. If you hired a live-in domestic servant in Canada in 1901, the probability was very high that you were hiring a Canadian-born woman of British, especially English, or French Canadian ethnicity. There had clearly been a change in the last decades of the nineteenth century. In 1871 and 1881 /first-generation immigrants were overrepresented among urban domestic servants, and the association of 'servant' with 'Irish' made some sense: in 1871 almost half of all female domestic servants ( N = 593) in urban places were Irish by origin (Darroch and Ornstein 2000).⁹ At the turn of the twentieth century, when the decline in the occupation of domestic servant began, the ethnic composition of workers was broadening, and the dependence on recent immigrants had declined.

Among the minority who were immigrants in 1901, few were recent immigrants. The 1901 census asked all immigrants to report their year of arrival in Canada: of all female live-in domestics born outside Canada, only 8 percent had arrived within the year prior to the taking of the census, and only 16 percent had arrived between 1898 and 1901. The overwhelming majority of immigrant domestic servants had several years' experience of their new country. The  Canadian-born,  furthermore,  were  not  always  country-born youth with no experience of urban life. Canadians were still a rural people in 1901, and most had been born in a rural community-only about one in /five Canadians had been born in an urban place. By comparison with their

contemporaries, however, women domestics were urbanites: a third had been born in an urban place. In Hamilton a majority of live-in female domestics were urban-born.1⁰

Whether immigrant  or  Canadian-born,  live-in  domestics  would  have had no di/fficulty communicating with their employers. The mother tongue of 92 percent was either English or French. Seventy-/five percent spoke English but not French, 10 percent spoke French but not English, and a remarkable 14 percent spoke both languages.11 Fewer than 1 percent spoke neither language. We cannot say much about their educational backgrounds, but we do know that they were literate and that literacy rates among servants were rising more quickly than among the general population. In 1901 the proportion of servants who could read and write was higher than that of the general adult population.12 Three decades earlier the literacy rate among urban domestic servants was much lower, and it was below the level in the adult population. In 1871, 10 percent of female domestic servants in urban places could not read; 15 percent could not write. By comparison, 7 percent of all adult women in the same urban places could not read; 11 percent could not write.

Most domestic servants in 1901 were literate young women who had been through the compulsory school systems of the late nineteenth century. A primary goal of schooling was the socialization of girls into gender-speci/fic and domestic roles. The goals of school promoters were not always realized, however, and historians of schooling have argued that schooling had ambiguous and even destabilizing e/ffects. Schooling could be conducive to the expectation of a dual wage-earning and familial role for young women (Gomersall 1994). Schooling and literacy may have contributed to the transformation of subjectivities among girls, to the development of self -interest and the con/fidence to assert that interest in reproductive and other realms (Gagnier 1991; Mackinnon 1997: 221; McDermid 2005). On January 27, 1886, a 'general servant' wrote to the Toronto Globe , 'Some of my happiest hours are spent in my kitchen, with my feet in the oven, and one of my favourite books, and in this age of literature and with the wages that a good servant can command no one need be without plenty of reading material' (quoted in Leslie 1974: 84). For this literate generation, domestic service, with its multiple denials of self, was easily equated with servility and was unlikely to /fit well with selfrealization (Fahrni 1997: 83).

The changing background of the new generation of domestic servants

helps us make sense of the chorus of bourgeois complaint about the ine/fficiency and undisciplined assertiveness of servants. This generation of women workers, fewer of whom grew up on farms, was more attuned to the rhythms of time-oriented wage-paid labor than to the rhythms and long hours of taskoriented work. They were quite capable of comparing their working hours with those of factory workers and telephone operators. They may have heard about  the  attempts  in  Britain  to  unionize  domestic  workers  in  the  1890s and early 1900s and to bargain for shorter hours (Horn 1975: 156-59). Even Finnish immigrant women in the early twentieth century included 'the class conscious maid' who read socialist newspapers and created 'organizations designed for the speci/fic purpose of promoting maids' interests' (LindstromBest 1988: 99-102). Here was an employee very di/fferent from the poor Irish immigrant of a rural background a generation earlier. Those earlier immigrants, according to Diane M. Hotten-Somers (2001: 185), eagerly embraced a job that carried the security of room and board and were apparently unaffected by the social stigma attached to domestic service.

Domestic servants had changed in the last decades of the nineteenth century, and so had their employers. Earlier censuses do not contain the rich information on class, earnings, and employment status that we /find in 1901, so comparisons are necessarily limited. Nevertheless, the urban household head who employed a domestic in 1901 was much more likely to be a merchant, manufacturer, professional, or government o/fficial than the comparable household head in 1871 (66 percent in 1901, compared to 50 percent in 1871). In 1871 it was possible for artisans, semiskilled or white-collar workers, and even other workers to employ servants; by 1901 a much smaller proportion of servants' employers were in these occupational categories. By 1901 household heads classed as 'employees' in the census could still employ servants, but they were an a/ffluent elite among employees: their average family earnings were $1,411, and very few families who employed a servant earned less than $300 a year.

In Canada, where multiservant households were rare, the domestic servant  was  a  solitary  stranger  in  the  bourgeois  household.  Most  domestics worked alone: in  over  80  percent  of  urban  households  with  a  live-in  servant, there was only one servant; 59 percent of live-in servants worked as the only servant in the household.13 Working in households that were larger than average (6.7 persons, compared to the urban average of 5.0), containing families at mature stages of the family cycle, usually with children still at home,

the young servant interacted with her master and mistress across the boundaries of age and class. One way to ensure greater familiarity was to work for a relative, but it appears that in 1901 a kin relationship between employer and servant was rare: only 2 percent of live-in servants had the same surname as  their  household  heads.1⁴  Instead,  many  employers  and  servants  appear to have sought a/ffinity in shared ethnicity or religion. The ethnic pro/file of employers is remarkably similar to that of the domestics themselves: 30.8 percent of employers were English or Welsh, and 29.2 percent of live-in servants were English or Welsh; 20.7 percent of employers were French Canadian, and 20.9 percent of servants were French Canadian; 20.0 percent of employers and 22.4 percent of servants were Irish. This similarity also exists at the level of the household: by a process of selection that must have worked on both sides, employers sought to hire and employees sought to work for people of the same ethnoreligious identity. Like the boardinghouse keepers and lodgers analyzed by Peter Baskerville (2001), employers sought 'familiar strangers' to enter their homes as resident domestics. Despite the campaigns to encourage immigrant domestic servants to come to Canada, Canadianborn household heads preferred to employ the Canadian-born: 78 percent of all female live-in domestics were Canadian-born, but 81 percent of those employed by Canadian household heads were Canadian-born. This apparent preference was often constrained by the local pool of young workers from whom domestics  were  recruited:  in  Manitoba  and  the western  territories Canadian-born household heads depended on a proportionally larger pool of immigrants, and so many more of their servants were born outside Canada.

Religion also mattered to employers (Ho/ffman and Taylor 1996: 11415). Thus 51 percent of female live-in domestics had the same religion as their employers. Catholic household heads hired Catholic servants. Methodist employers preferred Methodist servants. The pool of Methodist servants available was small-fewer than one in seven of all live-in servants employed in 1901-but 41 percent of the servants employed by Methodists were themselves Methodist. As this example indicates, measuring the pattern of preference or a/ffinity requires that we control for the size of the available pool of employees in each category. One way to do this is to observe the actual number of domestics of a speci/fic religion who worked for a person of the same religion. We can compare this observation to the number of domestics we might expect to /find if religion made no di/fference. Since 14.8 percent of all domestics were Methodist, for instance, we would expect to /find the same

## 526 Social Science History

Table 5 Distribution of domestic servants and employers in the same category, 1901

| Category                  | Observed   | Expected   | Ratio  (Observed/ expected)   |
|---------------------------|------------|------------|-------------------------------|
| Birthplace                |            |            |                               |
| Canada                    | 1,571      | 1,469.0    | 1.07                          |
| England                   | 48         | 24.2       | 1.98                          |
| Scotland                  | 4          | 2.0        | 2.00                          |
| Ireland                   | 10         | 6.1        | 1.64                          |
| Europe                    | 21         | 2.8        | 7.50                          |
| Religion                  |            |            |                               |
| Church of England         | 246        | 124.9      | 1.97                          |
| Methodist                 | 157        | 49.9       | 3.14                          |
| Presbyterian              | 188        | 79.3       | 2.37                          |
| Baptist                   | 43         | 5.1        | 8.43                          |
| Other Protestant          | 40         | 4.9        | 8.16                          |
| Catholic                  | 714        | 332.3      | 2.15                          |
| Eastern                   | 15         | 0.8        | 18.75                         |
| Ethnoreligious identity   |            |            |                               |
| English Church of England | 103        | 42.3       | 2.43                          |
| English Methodist         | 61         | 13.8       | 4.42                          |
| English other Protestant  | 39         | 11.6       | 3.36                          |
| French Catholic           | 430        | 113.5      | 3.79                          |
| Irish Catholic            | 90         | 23.4       | 3.85                          |
| Irish Protestant          | 82         | 36.0       | 2.28                          |
| Scots Presbyterian        | 69         | 27.0       | 2.56                          |
| Scots other               | 46         | 17.6       | 2.61                          |
| European Protestant       | 15         | 0.6        | 25.00                         |
| Chinese Confucian         | 13         | 0.6        | 21.67                         |

Source: Canadian Families Project 2002.

percentage of Methodists living with Methodist employers if religion made no di/fference. The ratio of observed to expected is a measure of the extent of the selection process at work in the hiring process (table 5).

We could, of course, compare the characteristics of the servant to those of the 'mistress' or wife of the household head, but the results would be very  similar,  given  the  strong  correlation  between  characteristics  of  the household head and those of his wife. Although the number of cases in some cells is small, it appears that cultural preference in/fluenced the selection of employees.  Local  labor  markets  constrained  this  preference,  especially  in the West. Live-in domestic servants in British Columbia were unlike those anywhere else in Canada: almost two-thirds were male, and a majority was

born in  either  China  or  Japan.  In Vancouver  in  1924  the  sensational  trial of  a  Chinese  'houseboy'  suspected  of  murder  displayed  the  widespread fear of  Asian  servants  (Starkins  1984).  However  strong  the  preference  for 'familiar strangers' in one's household, the supply and relative cheapness of the Chinese servant and the willingness of Chinese men to perform tasks such as chopping wood were clearly persuasive. And the constraints of local labor markets did not deter British Columbians from hiring live-in servants: relative to population, there were more live-in servants in British Columbia than in other provinces.1⁵ Even in British Columbia, however, the quest for 'familiar strangers'-employees who shared the religion, race, and ethnicity of their employers-persisted, as the campaigns for assisted immigration of young white British women suggest.

Despite the apparent e/ffort to ensure a degree of a/ffinity between servants and the familial household, the evidence does not suggest that employers always succeeded. On the contrary, more often than not the resident servant was a stranger. Almost 50 percent of servants were of a di/fferent religion from their employers, and outside Quebec the proportion was much higher. The majority of servants in English Anglican households were neither English nor Anglican. Most servants employed by Methodist families were not Methodist. The obvious exceptions were French Canadian employers: over 90 percent of the servants in their homes were French Canadian Catholics.

A/ffluent  Canadians  sought  to  hire  'respectable'  and  compliant  servants who would work long hours for low wages. When their e/fforts failed, as they often did, they failed to revalorize the occupation at the level of either wages or status. Modest e/fforts at professionalization were undermined by the contradictions of class. Uniforms did more to accentuate the social distance between employer and employee than to signal professional status or training (Barber 1984: 43). Reformers argued that hours of work and tasks should be de/fined and standardized, as in other occupations, but employers rejected  the  advice,  thereby emphasizing  the  di/fference  between  domestic service and other occupations (ibid.: 40). Employers lobbied successfully for the introduction of domestic science into the school curriculum and for technical training in housework but declined to raise the status of the occupation in their own households (Barber 1980: 152).

Other strategies further devalued the occupation. A major strategy before and after World War I was to pressure governments to increase the supply of cheap labor through immigration (Leslie 1974; Barber 1980, 1991). To some

extent this strategy worked: published census aggregates indicate that immigrants were overrepresented in the 'servant' category in 1911 and 1921. By 1921, 32.2 percent of female servants were /first-generation immigrants, and only 26.3 percent of women in the labor force were immigrants (Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1924). The strategy failed to persuade workers themselves to consider domestic service as anything other than a temporary transition. T urnover rates remained high, and the age pro/file changed little: the proportion who were teenagers actually increased from 28 percent in 1901 to 35 percent in 1921 (ibid.).

For  many  young  women,  domestic  service  remained  part  of  the  lifecourse transition between parental home and establishing one's own household on marriage. The length of the transition from parental home to marriage had a direct e/ffect on labor supply at a time when paid employment among women was largely restricted to the young and single. In Canada, as elsewhere, marriage rates and marriage age were closely related to labor force participation: the census microdata for 1901 yield a very strong positive correlation between the proportion of women aged 18 to 24 in each ethnoreligious  group who were single and the labor force participation rates of women in those groups. The same applies to domestic service: Irish Catholic women tended to delay marriage or remain single; Irish Catholics were overrepresented in domestic service and were more likely than others to remain in the occupation beyond the age of 30. It is perhaps no coincidence that the 1891 peak in employment of domestic servants in Canada coincided with the nineteenth-century peak in average age at /first marriage (26) for women and in the proportion of women who never married (Mertens 1976; Gee 1982: 314;  Burke  2001:  191).  Age  at  /first  marriage  fell  sharply  in  the  /first  three decades of the twentieth century, and the age of leaving school rose; the e/ffect was to shorten the length of the transition from parental home to one's own household and to constrain the total supply of female labor.

These demographic changes interacted with other changes to reduce the supply of domestic servants. At the same time that the transition to marriage and one's own household was shortening, the comparative advantage of domestic service was declining. Sending a daughter into domestic service was often part of a family strategy for survival as well as an individual strategy designed to win a degree of independence and to increase one's chances of upward social mobility. Central to the parental strategy in the Netherlands (Bras 2003; Bras and Kok 2003) and in the Maritime Provinces of Canada

(Beattie 2000) was the return of a portion of the daughter's earnings to help sustain cash-starved family farms. In Canada the strategy was failing by the 1930s, if not before (ibid.: 122-23). Sending daughters into employment and residence outside the parental home also entailed risks: parental control of daughters' earnings and access to their unpaid domestic labor was much more certain if the daughter remained at home (Takai 2001: 123-24). In the northern Netherlands the advantages of keeping children at home outweighed the short-term bene/fits of cash returns from children living elsewhere (Paping 2004). In Canada, especially as agriculture expanded in the prairie West in the early twentieth century, parents persuaded their o/ffspring to remain on the farm and provide unpaid labor; the e/ffect was to limit labor supply in the wage  economy  (Sylvester  2001).  As  an  individual  strategy,  domestic  service may also have yielded the same low returns that Paping reports for the Netherlands. The bene/fits in terms of skills and social capital from employment in domestic service were likely to have been negligible and certainly less  than  in  teaching  or clerical  work,  the  occupations  that  expanded  and continued to become 'feminized' as domestic service declined. The 'servant problem' of the early twentieth century, therefore, re/flected the failure of  a  targeted  immigration  strategy  to  sustain  an  occupation-speci/fic  labor supply squeezed between the pincers of demographic change and changing family and individual strategies.

From these conditions emerged another strategy, a Canadian variation on an international trend. The household was a place of work, a site of both production and consumption. Its work process experienced a form of industrialization and deskilling: gradually and intermittently, labor was replaced by technology, and work was submitted to a type of rational management intended to reduce dependence on the knowledge and skill of workers (Marchand 1988; see also Rutherford 2003: 90-95). Writing mainly about Canada, Tanis Day (1992: 302, 314) argued that capital-labor substitution was propelled in part by the rising cost of female labor; the evidence on wage trends presented here questions this argument, at least insofar as it applies to the /first decades of the twentieth century. The more important impetus to the application of new technology was the need to solve the 'servant problem'the twofold problem of a shortage of labor and a shortage of that 'class' of respectable and compliant female worker whom bourgeois employers sought to allow into their homes. Although the shift to a servantless kitchen met resistance and mechanization did not always result in a reduction in labor, by

the 1920s the servantless home was in sight (Cowan 1976, 1983; Sutherland 1981; Palmer 1989).

The  substitution  of  new  machines  for  domestic  labor  occurred  more slowly in Canada than in the United States (Dodd 1989; Parr 1999), but its beginnings synchronized closely with the decline in live-in domestic service in the /first three decades of the twentieth century. The oil and coal stoves of the 1890s were followed in the early 1900s by a much larger selection of coal and gas ranges, and by 1924, 6 percent of Ontarians had such a range in  their  homes.  According  to  a  1910  advertisement  in  Eaton's  department store catalog, the suction-pump vacuum cleaner, operated by a child and a uniformed servant, would clean a house 'in one-/fifth the time and one-tenth the  labor  that  the  old  way  takes'  (quoted  in  Glazebrook  et  al.  1969:  136; see also Leslie 1974: 78). The electrically powered upright vacuum cleaner was invented in the United States early in the /first decade of the 1900s and appeared in Canada in the 1910s; by 1924, 8.6 percent of Ontarians possessed the machine. The wringer washers of the 1890s soon acquired electric power, and  by  1924,  7.3  percent  of  Ontarians  had  an  electric-powered  washing machine in their homes (Day 1992: 311). A more a/ffordable 'electric servant' was the electric iron (Strasser 1982: 78-82). In advertising their products, retailers were explicit about the substitution of machines for labor. 'If you can't solve your servant problem, we will solve it for you with an electric clothes washer'; 'No longer need a household be dependent on an undependable  washerwoman';  'No  laundress  to  pay'  ( Toronto  Globe ,  August 27, 1920; September 3, 1920; October 1, 1920). In many households the task range of the general servant was reduced as new divisions of labor appeared. Between 1901 and 1921, for instance, more households had their laundry done outside the home, and the number of launderers and laundresses grew by a factor of 2.6 (Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1924). Specifying 'no laundry' was one means of making a general-servant job seem more attractive (Barber 1984: 43).

The technological transformation began in a small proportion of households, but the households that could a/fford the new machines were precisely those that employed servants. Even the wealthiest families could be pressured into cost-cutting e/fficiency and a form of scienti/fic management. Jack Eaton, of the famous Canadian department store family, moved into a oneservant home on marriage in 1901 and learned to manage his own clothes closet (Macpherson 1963: 45). By 1909 the complications of three half-days

o/ff  per  week for their three servants drove Jack Eaton's wife, Flora Eaton (1956: 146), into 'scienti/fic housekeeping' and collaboration with the School of  Household Science at the University of Toronto. In the same year her husband began advertising electric vacuum cleaners in his department store catalog.

Technological change facilitated the decline in domestic service, but the decline began in the changing relations between employers and a new generation  of  servants  in  the  households  of  the  bourgeoisie  and  middle-class professionals. The agents of change included the workers themselves: young women rejected this occupation for others, and even those who entered it soon quit, treating domestic service as part of the transition to a new country or the transition from the parental household. At least in Canada, rejecting domestic service did not entail the sacri/fice of higher earnings; it was a rejection of both low wages and the speci/fic conditions of exploitation of which the  live-in  wage was  part.  For  young  workers  at  the  turn  of  the  century, the  advantages  of  room  and  board  were  less  likely  to  compensate  for  the constraints of live-in service than they had been for an earlier generation of domestic servants. Employers responded to these highly mobile and recalcitrant workers by campaigning for cheap immigrant labor and by trying to assimilate  these  coresident  strangers  within  familial  norms  and  ethnoreligious  compatibility. The  strategies  were  self-defeating:  servants  were  not family members but workers, selling their labor in markets where the range of choice was expanding.

As the occupation 'servant' declined, the association of housework with women deepened. The decline of the occupation meant the decline of housework as paid labor; it meant an end to embryonic e/fforts at professionalization; it meant that the real levels of skill and knowledge embedded in the work went unrecognized; and it meant 'more work for mother'-the transfer of labor to an unpaid and unrecognized servant.

The constraints of class and gender yielded unforeseen and unintended consequences;  the  actions  and  resistance  of  workers  had  ambiguous  and contradictory results. As Janice Williams Rutherford (2003: 64) has pointed out, to reduce costs by replacing the human servant with mechanical servants implied that the housewife's time had no value. E/fforts to liberate women from domestic drudgery led, in an ironic twist of the class-gender nexus, to the devaluation of household work and new forms of domestic con/finement.

Workers' search for freedom from domestic subservience, their exercise of

choice in labor markets, and their quest for autonomy of person and household in the emerging liberal order led to new forms of subservience and the widespread denial that household work was a form of production. A /final conclusion on the alleged decline of domestic service, therefore, is that there was no decline at all. The paid occupation of live-in servant declined, but the occupation and the work survived, renamed and newly embodied in the housewife of the twentieth century. In advertisements for household appliances in the 1920s, both servant and housewife appear, sometimes together, but  the  latter  soon  takes  the  machinery  and  tasks  away  from  her  former employee. The construction of the modern housewife began in the class relations of the domestic workplace of the early twentieth century.

## Notes

I am deeply indebted to Peter Baskerville and Lisa Helps for their comments and to the anonymous reviewers for Social Science History .

- 1 The national  sample  of  the  1901  census  contains  all  individual-level  information (Schedule  1)  and  property  information  (Schedule  2)  for  265,287  individuals  in 50,941 dwellings. The sampling point was the dwelling place; a random sample of 5 percent of dwellings for each of 129 micro/film reels was selected (Canadian Families Project 2002; Sager et al. 2002). On the implications of the sampling process, see Ornstein 2000.
- 2 A convenient summary of trends from 1881 to 1921 is Dominion Bureau of Statistics 1924, 4: table 1.
- 3 Other  subcategories  include  launderers  ($193),  housekeepers  ($178),  and  cooks ($185). An unknown proportion of these would have been live-in servants.
- 4 The Labour Gazette (1900)  gives  rents  of  four-room  houses  ranging  from  $6  per month in Halifax and Montreal to $7 in Toronto and $10 in Vancouver. If a worker paid half of the rental cost, then annual rents were $36 in Halifax and Montreal, $42 in Toronto, and $60 in Vancouver. Elsewhere I estimate costs of a modest adult male diet ranging from 13.2 cents per day in Halifax to 17.2 cents in Vancouver; annual costs would be $48 in Halifax, $50 in Montreal, $52 in Hamilton, and $63 in Vancouver (Baskerville and Sager 1998: 217-21).
- 5 Estimates from the national sample may not be identical to those reported in the 1907 Census and Statistics Bulletin , because the categories may di/ffer. It is reassuring that the average earnings of women domestics reported in the national sample are close to those in the Bulletin . The mean annual earnings for domestic servants in the national sample (occupation codes 61415, 61418, 61419, 61425, 61431, 61432, and 61436 through 61443) are $177.76 for men ( N = 421) and $116.87 for women ( N = 2,645). The Bulletin reports $182 per year for male servants and $120 for female servants.

- 6 Estimated from a database created by the Canadian Families Project containing the total population of Victoria in 1901.
- 7 Live-in domestic servants cannot be selected in the complete-coverage 1881 census database, since that census did not report relationship to the household head. I have selected speci/fic occupations in that database: housekeeper, steward, butler, cook, servant,  house  servant,  personal  servant,  nursemaid,  companion,  chambermaid, and charwoman. To exclude farm servants, I select 11 major urban centers: Halifax, Saint John, Quebec, Trois Rivières, Montreal, Ottawa, Kingston, Toronto, Hamilton, London, and Victoria.
- 8 From the 1871 national sample (Darroch and Ornstein 2000), I select all women with an urban residence and an occupation in service (codes 7000 through 7999).
- 9 In 1881, 37 percent of the domestic servants in 11 Canadian cities were Irish by origin. Of the total labor force in those cities, 29 percent were Irish. For 1871 I select urban places with 3,000 or more people and individuals having an 'industry' code of 70 (domestic and personal service).
- 10 urban place. In Hamilton 54 percent of female live-in domestics ( N = 1,051) were urban-born. This estimate is from a complete-count database of the population of Hamilton in 1901.
- 11 Column 31 of Schedule 1 recorded whether a person could speak English; column 32 reported the ability to speak French.
- 12 Of all persons aged 15 through 64, 94 percent for whom an entry is recorded in the 'can read' column responded a/ffirmatively; 93 percent of the enumerated adult population  reported  that  they  could  write.  By  comparison,  97  percent  of  live-in domestic women could read, and 96 percent could write.
- 13 I  have  removed  large  institutions  by  excluding  all  dwellings  with  more  than  30 persons.
- 14 Kin relations may have been more frequent in 1881: the complete-coverage database suggests that 20 percent of those with a domestic service occupation had the same surname as their household head. A large proportion of these servants may have been working outside the household where they resided, however.
- 15 In Victoria in 1901 live-in servants ( N = 753) were 3.6 percent of the total city population and 9.7 percent of persons with occupations. In all Canadian towns or cities of 10,000 people or more, live-in domestics were 2.5 percent of the population and 6.0 percent of those with occupations.

## References

Altman, Morris (1992) 'Revised real Canadian GNP estimates and Canadian economic growth, 1870-1926.' Review of Income and Wealth 38: 455-73. Barber, Marilyn (1980) 'The women Ontario welcomed: Immigrant domestics for Ontario

homes, 1870-1930.' Ontario History 72 (3): 148-72.

/threeemdash  (1984)  'Below  stairs:  The  domestic  servant.'  Material  History  Bulletin  19: 37-46.

/threeemdash (1991) Immigrant Domestic Servants in Canada. Booklet 16. Ottawa: Canadian Historical Association.

Baskerville, Peter (2000) 'Displaying the working class: The 1901 census of Canada.' Historical Methods 33: 229-34.

/threeemdash (2001) 'Familiar strangers: Urban families with boarders, Canada, 1901.' Social Science History 25: 321-46.

Baskerville, Peter, and Eric W . Sager (1998) Unwilling Idlers: The Urban Unemployed and Their Families in Late Victorian Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Beattie, Betsy (2000) Obligation and Opportunity: Single Maritime Women in Boston, 1870-1930. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

Bras, Hilde (2003) 'Maids to the city: Migration patterns of female domestic servants from the province of Zeeland, the Netherlands (1850-1950).' History of the Family 8: 217-46.

Bras, Hilde, and Jan Kok (2003) ''Naturally, every child was supposed to work': Determinants of the leaving home process in the Netherlands, 1850-1940,' in F . Van Poppel, M. Oris, and J. Lee (eds.) The Road to Independence: Leaving Home in Western and Eastern Societies, Sixteenth-T wentieth Centuries. Bern: Lang: 403-50.

Burke, Stacie D. A. (2001) 'Marriage in 1901 Canada: An ecological perspective.' Journal of Family History 26: 189-219.

Canadian Families Project (2002) 1901 Census of Canada Database [machine-readable dataset], web.uvic.ca/hrd/cfp/index.html. Victoria, BC: University of Victoria.

Census  O/ffice  (1907)  Census  and  Statistics  Bulletin  I:  Wage  Earners  by  Occupation. Ottawa: Dawson.

Cowan, Ruth Schwarz (1976) 'The 'industrial revolution' in the home: Household technology and social  change  in  the  twentieth  century.'  T echnology and  Culture  17: 1-23.

/threeemdash (1983) More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave. New York: Basic Books.

Darroch, Gordon, and Michael Ornstein (1980) 'Ethnicity and occupational structure in Canada in 1871: The vertical mosaic in historical perspective.' Canadian Historical Review 61: 305-33.

/threeemdash (2000) Canadian Historical Mobility Project: 1871 Census SPSS Portable File. Toronto: Institute for Social Research, York University.

Darroch, Gordon, and Lee Soltow (1991) Property and Inequality in Victorian Ontario: Structural Patterns and Cultural Communities in the 1871 Census. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Day, Tanis (1992) 'Capital-labour substitution in the home.' Technology and Culture 33: 302-27.

Dodd, Dianne (1989) 'Delivering electrical technology to the Ontario housewife, 19201939: An alliance of professional women, advertisers, and the electrical industry.' PhD diss., Carleton University.

Dominion Bureau of Statistics (1924) Census of Canada, 1921. Vols. 4-5. Ottawa: King's Printer.

/threeemdash (1933) Census of Canada, 1931. Vol. 5. Ottawa: King's Printer.

Eaton, Flora McCrea (1956) Memory's Wall: The Autobiography of Flora McCrea Eaton. Toronto: Clarke, Irwin.

Fahrni, Magda (1997) ''Ru/ffled' mistresses and 'discontented' maids: Respectability and the case of domestic service, 1880-1914.' Labour/Le Travail 39: 69-97.

Gagnier, Regenia (1991) Subjectivities: A History of Self-Representation in Britain, 18321920. New York: Oxford University Press.

Gee, Ellen M. (1982) 'Marriage in nineteenth-century Canada.' Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 19: 311-25.

Glazebrook, G. de T., Katharine Brett, and Judith McErvel (1969) A Shopper's View of Canada's Past: Pages from Eaton's Catalogues, 1886-1910. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Gomersall, Meg (1994) 'Education for domesticity? A nineteenth-century perspective on girls' schooling and education.' Gender and Education 6: 1-12.

Ho/ffman, Frances, and Ryan Taylor (1996) Much to Be Done: Private Life in Ontario from Victorian Diaries. Toronto: Natural Heritage/Natural History.

Horn,  Pamela  (1975)  The  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Victorian  Servant.  New  York:  St.

Martin's.

Hotten-Somers,  Diane  M.  (2001)  'Relinquishing  and  reclaiming  independence:  Irish domestic servants, American middle-class mistresses, and assimilation, 1850-1920.' Eire-Ireland 36: 185-201.

Katzman, David M. (1978) Seven Days a Week: Women and Domestic Service in Industrializing America. New York: Oxford University Press.

Labour Gazette (1900) 'Schedule showing rates paid for board and lodging by workingmen.' 1: 100.

Lacelle,  Claudette  (1987)  Urban  Domestic  Servants  in  Nineteenth-Century  Canada. Ottawa: Environment Canada.

Lasser, Carol (1987) 'The domestic balance of power: Relations between mistresses and maids in nineteenth-century New England.' Labor History 28: 5-22.

Lenskyj, Helen (1981) 'A 'servant problem' or a 'servant-mistress problem'? Domestic service in Canada, 1890-1930.' Atlantis 7: 3-11.

Leslie,  Genevieve  (1974)  'Domestic  service  in  Canada,  1880-1920,'  in  Janice  Acton, Penny Goldsmith, and Bonnie Shepard (eds.) Women at Work: Ontario, 1850-1930. Toronto: Canadian Women's Educational Press: 71-125.

Lindstrom-Best, Varpu (1988) De/fiant Sisters: A Social History of Finnish Immigrant Women in Canada. Toronto: Multicultural History Society of Ontario.

Mackinnon, Alison (1997) Love and Freedom: Professional Women and the Reshaping of Personal Life. Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.

Macpherson, Mary-Etta (1963) Shopkeepers to a Nation: The Eatons. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.

Marchand, Suzanne (1988) 'L'impact des innovations technologiques sur la vie quotidi-

enne des Québécoises du début du XXe siècle (1910-1940).' Material History Bulletin 28: 1-14.

McBride, Theresa M. (1976) The Domestic Revolution: The Modernisation of Household Service in England and France, 1820-1920. New York: Holmes and Meier.

McDermid, Jane (2005) The Schooling of Working-Class Girls in Victorian Scotland: Gender, Education, and Identity. London: Routledge.

McLean,  Lorna  R.,  and  Marilyn  Barber  (2004)  'In  search  of  comfort  and  independence: Irish immigrant domestic servants encounter the courts, jails, and asylums in nineteenth-century Ontario,' in M. Epp, F . Iacovetta, and F . Swyripa (eds.) Sisters or Strangers? Immigrant, Ethnic, and Racialized Women in Canadian History. Toronto: University of Toronto Press: 133-60.

Mertens, Walter (1976) 'Canadian nuptiality patterns: 1911-1961.' Canadian Studies in Population 3: 57-71.

North  Atlantic  Population  Project  and  Minnesota  Population  Center  (2004)  NAPP: Complete Count Microdata: Canada 1881. Preliminary Version NAPP 0.2 [machinereadable dataset]. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center, www.nappdata.org.

Ornstein, Michael (2000) 'Analysis of household samples: The 1901 census of Canada.' Historical Methods 33: 195-99.

Palmer, Phyllis M. (1989) Domesticity and Dirt: Housewives and Domestic Servants in the United States, 1920-1945. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Paping, Richard (2004) 'Family strategies concerning migration and occupations of children in a market-oriented agricultural economy.' History of the Family 9: 159-91.

Parr,  Joy  (1999)  Domestic Goods: The Material, the Moral, and the Economic in the Postwar Years. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Rutherford, Janice Williams (2003) Selling Mrs. Consumer: Christine Frederick and the Rise of Household E/fficiency. Athens: University of Georgia Press.

Sager,  Eric  W .  (2000)  'National  data  on  working-class  earnings:  The  1901  census  of Canada.' Historical Methods 33: 235-41.

/threeemdash (2007) 'Inequality , earnings, and the Canadian working class in 1901,' in Eric W . Sager and Peter Baskerville (eds.) Household Counts: Canadian Families and Households in 1901. Toronto: University of Toronto Press: 339-70.

Sager,  Eric  W .,  and  Christopher  Morier  (2002)  'Immigrants,  ethnicity,  and  earnings in  1901:  Revisiting  Canada's  vertical  mosaic.'  Canadian  Historical  Review  83: 196-229.

Sager, Eric W., Douglas K. Thompson, and Marc Trottier (2002). The National Sample of the 1901 Census of Canada: User's Guide. Victoria, BC: Canadian Families Project.

Salverson,  Laura  Goodman  (1981  [1939])  Confessions  of  an  Immigrant's  Daughter.

Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Schwarz, Leonard (1999) 'English servants and their employers during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.' Economic History Review 52: 236-56.

Scott,  Jean  Thomson  (1892)  The  Conditions  of  Female  Labour  in  Ontario. Toronto: Warwick.

Starkins,  Edward  (1984)  Who  Killed  Janet  Smith?  The  1924  Vancouver  Killing That Remains Canada's Most Intriguing Unsolved Murder. Toronto: Macmillan. Strasser,  Susan  (1982)  Never  Done:  A  History  of  American  Housework.  New  York: Pantheon. Sutherland, Daniel E. (1981) Americans and Their Servants: Domestic Service in the United States from 1800 to 1920. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. Sylvester, Kenneth M. (2001) 'Household composition and Canada's rural capitalism: The extent of rural labor markets in 1901.' Journal of Family History 26: 289-309. Takai, Yukari (2001) 'Shared earnings, unequal responsibilities: Single French-Canadian wage-earning women in Lowell, Massachusetts, 1900-1920.' Labour/Le Travail 47: 115-32.

Copyright of Social Science History is the property of Duke University Press and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission: However , Users may download , or email articles for individual Use. print ,