## Babbage's  Intelligence: Calculating  Engines and the  Factory System

## Simon  Schaffer

In summer  1823 the new and controversial Astronomical  Society  of London  decided  to award its  gold  medal  to one  of its own founder  members, the  equally  controversial  Cambridge-trained  mathematician Charles Babbage.  The  award  formed  part  of  an  energetic  campaign  to  launch  the construction  of a Difference  Engine,  a machine  to calculate  navigational and  astronomical  tables.  In  his  address  to  the  society  in  early  1824,  its president, the financier,  mathematician, and  orientalist Henry Colebrooke,  summed  up  the  significance  of  Babbage's planned device:  'In other  cases,  mechanical  devices  have  substituted  machines  for  simpler tools or for  bodily  labour.... But the invention  to which  I am  adverting ... substitutes  mechanical  performance for  an  intellectual process'.  In other  words,  'Mr  Babbage's  invention  puts  an  engine  in  place  of the computer'.'  This  may  seem  a  paradoxical  comment  on  the  man who  is now lauded  as the  computer's  inventor. But as with terms such as  typewriter,  e th word  computer  eferred  here  to a human  being,  in  this case  the  hireling r employed  to  perform  the  exhausting  reckoning  which  every  astronomical  operation  required.  Babbage  himself  applied  for the  post  of  computer at the  Royal Observatory,  Greenwich,  in  summer  1814,  until  dissuaded

Thanks  to  Billy  Ashworth,  Bob  Brain,  William  Ginn,  Iwan  Morus,  Otto  Sibum,  and Richard  Staley  for their  generous  help  and to the librarians at the  University  of  Cambridge Library,  the  British  Library,  and  the  Royal Society  for  help  with  manuscripts  in  their  possession.

1.  Henry  Thomas  Colebrooke,  'On  Presenting the  Gold  Medal  of  the  Astronomical Society  to  Charles  Babbage',  Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  ociety  1  (1825):  509-10; S Charles Babbage,  letter to  John  Herschel,  27  June  1823,  Royal Society  Herschel  Papers,  HS 2:184.

Critical  nquiry  21  (Autumn  1994) I

? 1994  by  The  University  of  Chicago.  0093-1896/94/2101-0008$01.00. All  rights  reserved.

from  the  thankless  task. The  labour  of  verifying  'the calculations of  the computers'  required  in  compiling  astronomical  tables soon  prompted a characteristic  expostulation: 'I wish  to  God  these  calculations  had  been executed by steam!'  Hence developed the plans for  the Difference Engine.2

Gesturing  toward the  urgent  issues of  technological  redundancy  and the  subordination  of  the  labour  process,  Colebrooke's  remark  provides the  theme  of  my  story  of  the  connexion which  Babbage  helped  forge between  the  development  of machinofacture  and the  design  of  intelligent machines. A  key  to this link is the term  intelligence. The  word refers both to  signals  received  from without and to the  capacity  to  register  and interpret  these  signals.  In  early  nineteenth-century Britain  the  word  intelligence simultaneously  embodied  the  growing  system  of social surveillance and  the  emerging mechanisation  of  natural  philosophies of  mind.3  In what  follows,  I  explore the  coproduction of  ideologically  freighted accounts  of  intelligence and  politically  charged  systems  of  machinery.  To make machines  look  intelligent  it was  necessary  that the sources  of their power,  the  labour  force  which  surrounded  and  ran  them,  be  rendered invisible. This  is  why Siegfried  Giedion's brilliant  study  of automation  is subtitled A contribution  o  anonymous istory.  ike  him,  I am concerned  with t h L the  mundane  places  of intelligence.  London  in  the  1820s  and  1830s was a fractured world.  South  of the  river,  in  Lambeth,  were  the  workshops  of the  machinists  whose  labours  drove  the  production of  automatic  tools and  accurate  design  (see  fig.  1).  In  the  fashionable  milieu  of  the  West End,  genteel Londoners  could  witness  shows  of  the  triumphs  of  these new machine  systems  in  public  lectures and  carefully  orchestrated  museums.  Here,  too,  were the wardens of scientific reason-the Astronomical Society,  the  Royal Society,  the  Royal  Institution.  Northwards  again,  in the fashionable  houses  of  Marylebone,  lived  men  such  as  Charles  Babbage and Charles Darwin,  ambitious reformers who  sought  to rethink  human nature  in the name  of a reconstructed  scientific and  social order. And in the northeast were the  huge  working-class  districts, areas where  Babbage sought  to run  for  parliamentary  office  and  where  his socialist critics de-

- 2. Herschel,  letter to  Babbage,  25 Oct.  1814,  Royal Society,  HS 2:31,  and H.  W.  Buxton, Memoir  of  the  Life  and Labours  of  the  Late Charles Babbage,  ed.  Anthony  Hyman  (1880;  Cambridge,  Mass., 1988),  p.  46;  hereafter  abbreviated M.
- 3.  For the uses of  intelligence, see  Michel  Foucault,  Discipline  nd Punish:  The  Birth  of  the a Prison,  trans. Alan  Sheridan  (New  York, 1979),  pp.  195-228; Ian  Hacking,  The  Taming  of Chance  (Cambridge,  1990),  pp.  55-63;  and Adrian  Desmond,  The  Politics  of  Evolution:  Morphology,  Medicine,  and  Reform  n Radical  London  (Chicago,  1989),  pp.  114-17. i

Simon  Schaffer  is  Reader  in  History  and  Philosophy  of  Science  at the  University  of  Cambridge.  He  has coedited  books  on  the  history  and sociology  of  experiment and on the work of William Whewell.

I

St  aul's

P fere;nce

I

FIG.  1.-Map of London  in the  1830s.

<!-- image -->

bated  with him on  the  hustings  about  machinery's  effects. This  is the  geography  of  Babbage's intelligence, the  world where  his  systematic  vision was  forged.4

Systems  are  socially  constructed  and  so,  as we  are  increasingly  reminded, are  the productive and unproductive bodies  which  inhabit them.  This  is  why  Babbage's  most  penetrating London reader,  Karl Marx, famously  reckoned  that it would be easier to write 'a  critical  history of  technology',  'a  history  of the  productive  organs  of man in  society'  than to  produce Darwin's  'history  of  natural  technology'.  Babbage's  moment was  decisive  for  the  construction  of  sociotechnical systems  and  for  the perception  that the world of the  productive  work force was ordered  systematically.  These processes  of  construction  and  perception should  not be  separated;  but  there  is a whole  history  to be  written  of  the  counterclaim  that  they  can  be  teased  apart,  that  the  point  of  view  from  which the  systematic  character  of  the  sociotechnical  world  can  be  detected  is independent of  that  world. Early  Victorian  society  provided  major  re-

4.  'History writing  is ever  tied  to the  fragment'  (Siegfried  Giedion,  Mechanization  akes T Command:  A Contribution  o  Anonymous  istory  [1948;  New  York, 1970],  p.  3).  For London's t H geography, see Iwan  Morus,  Jim  Secord,  and  Simon  Schaffer,  'Scientific  London', in London-World  City  1800-1840, ed.  Celina Fox  (New  Haven,  Conn.,  1992),  pp.  129-42.

sources  for  this claim and  it must  be  studied  in  detail  to  show  how  this position  was  developed. The  philosophers  of  manufacture,  such as Babbage,  carefully  constructed  a  place  from  which  they  could  make out  the lineaments  of the  factory system.  Critics of this  philosophy,  such as Marx, pointed out  the political  implications of  this  construction. During  the London  Chartist debates in  1856 about the science embodied  in the machinery  of the automatic  system  and  the fate of the worker's  body,  Marx announced that  'all our  invention and  progress  seem  to  result  in  endowing  material forces with intellectual  life,  and in  stultifying  human  life into  a  material  force',  and  in  his  notebooks  of  1857-58, where  he  observed  that 'it is the  machine  which  possesses  skill and  strength  in  place of the worker,  is itself the  virtuoso,  with a soul of its own in the mechanical laws  acting through  it'. Within the  'system  of  machinery',  as Marx defined it,  'the  automatic  one  is  merely  its  most  complete, most  adequate  form, and  alone  transforms  machinery  into  a  system'.  What  follows  is  not  a 'critical  history  of  technology', but  it  is  an attempt  to  show  where  the systematic  vision came from,  the  geography  of its  development, and some of the  political  and  technical effects it  had.5

## 1.  Intelligence  n  Marylebone i

Babbage's  designs for intelligent machines  dominated his  career from  the  moment  he  reached  Marylebone  as a  wealthy  and  ambitious analyst  in the  1810s.  His Difference  Engine  was based on the mathematical  principle  that the successive differences  of values of  polynomials  were ultimately  constants,  so tables of these values could be  computed  by  addition and subtraction of predetermined constants. The device was launched  in  London  in  summer  1822,  and  after  many  vicissitudes,  including  its nationalisation  in  early  1830,  it  collapsed forever  amidst  recriminations  between  Babbage  and  his master  engineer  Joseph  Clement in  summer  1834.  Then  in  the  mid-1830s Babbage began  negotiating  a new  contract with Clement's  former  draftsman,  C. G.  Jarvis,  to  plan  an Analytical Engine,  an  unprecedented technical  system  with a  huge  memory,  a  store,  an  input-output  device  using  number and variable cards, and

5.  Karl  Marx,  Capital: A  Critique  of  Political Economy,  trans.  Ben  Fowkes, 2 vols.  (1867; Harmondsworth,  1976):  1:493 n.  4,  hereafter  abbreviated  C; 'Speech  at the  Anniversary  of the  People's aper'  (Apr.  14  1856),  Karl  Marx:  Selected  Works,  d.  V.  Adoratsky  and  C.  P. Dutt, P e 2 vols.  (London, 1942),  2:428;  and  Notebook  6  (February  1858),  Grundrisse,  trans. Martin Nicolaus,  ed.  Nicolaus  and  Fowkes  (Harmondsworth, 1973),  pp.  692-93. For Marx as a systems  theorist,  see Thomas  P. Hughes,  'The Order of the  Technological  World',  History  of Technology    (1980):  5-7, 5 and  Raniero  Panzieri,  'The  Capitalist  Use  of  Machinery:  Marx Versus the  "Objectivists"',  rans.  Quintin  Hoare,  in Outlines  f  a  Critique f Technology,  .  Phil t o o ed Slater  (London,  1980), pp.  44-68.

j'"c~?J~~~rk?j'~?~J1~

FIG.  2.-The mechanism  for  anticipation  in the  Analytical Engine.  From Charles Babbage,  The  Analytical  Engine  and Mechanical  Notation,  vol. 3 of The  Works  f  Charles  abbage,  ed. o B Martin  Campbell-Kelly  (New  York, 1989),  p.  250.

<!-- image -->

a control system of operation cards. The crucial aspects of the new  Analytical Engine,  its  capacity  for  memory  nd  anticipation,  were  proa found  resources  for  Babbage's  metaphysics  and  his  political  economy (see  fig.  2).

Babbage organised  a series of remarkable  publicity campaigns  for his engines,  both in Britain and elsewhere-in Berlin,  Paris,  and Turin. The terms  of  this  propaganda revealed  the  politics  of  his  campaign  for  the mechanisation  of  intelligence. In  1838  he  confessed  that 'in  substituting mechanism  for the  performance  of  operations  hitherto executed  by  intellectual  labour,... the  analogy  between  these  acts and  the  operations  of the  mind  almost forced  upon  me the  figurative employment  of the same terms'.  He  was  committed to phrases such  as  'the  engine knows' to describe its predetermined move  from  one calculation to the next (M, p.  216  n.  8).  Babbage's  new  science  of  operations,  an  algebra  of machine  analysis designed  to describe  the  engines'  work,  was  proposed  as a discipline  of  complete  generality  both  within  the  surveillance  of  mental labour and in the  manufacture  of exact  values.  Initially designed  to 'see at a  glance  what  every  moving  piece  in the  machinery  was  doing  at each instant  of  time',  this  panoptic  notation  was  proffered  as a  technology of universal  management.  Babbage  stressed  the  advantages  of machine  semiotics because  'of all our  senses  that of  sight  conveys  intelligence most

rapidly  to  the  mind'.6 The  industrial  journalist  Dionysius  Lardner  reported  that the  working  of the human  body  and the  factory system  could both  be  represented and  managed  this  way.  The analogy  of  machine, body,  and  workshop  was  developed at  once:  'not  only  the  mechanical connection  of  the  solid  members  of  the  bodies  of  men' but  also,  'in the form of a connected  plan  or  map,  the  organization  of an extensive  factory, or  any great public  institution,  in which a vast number  of individuals  are employed,  and  their  duties  regulated  (as they  generally  are or  ought  to be) by  a consistent  and  well-digested  system'.  It is for this reason  that the term  system  requires  further  historical  analysis.  The  panoptic  gaze  which revealed  the order  of the  factory system  and  the  mechanism  of the  body also rendered  the work force and its resistance rather hard to  see.7

According  to  Babbage's leading  Italian  disciple,  the  military engineer and  future  Piedmont  premier  Luigi Federigo  Menabrea,  Babbage's  'engine  may  be considered  as a real  manufactory  of numbers'. As historians such as Maxine  Berg  have  demonstrated,  these  engines  for manufacturing  numbers  and  mechanising  intelligence  were  developed  alongside  the discourse  of  Ricardian  political  economy.  The 'philosophy  of  manufactures'  provided  Babbage  with an account of what he 'called the "domestic economy  of the  factory"'  and  also with an  analysis  of  the  skilled  labour embodied  in  machinery.8 Babbage's publications  on  the  economy  of the factory  culminated  in his  masterly  book of  1832,  On  the Economy  ofMachinery  and  Manufactures,  a work based  on  intelligence  gathered  throughout the  factories of  Britain,  soon  translated  into  every  major European  language.  As the  Analytical Engine  was a  'manufactory  of  figures',  so  Babbage had  to  outline his  definition of a manufactory.  'A considerable difference  exists  between  the  terms  making  and  manufacturing',  he  explained  in his economics  text.9 The  difference  lay  in the economical  regulation  of  the domestic system  of  the factory.  This led to Babbage's

- 6.  Babbage,  draft of  'On a Method  of  Expressing  by Signs  the Action  of  Machinery', University  of  Cambridge  Library,  Add.  MSS 8705:21,  later  published  in  Philosophical  ransT actions 116,  no.  3  (1826):  250-65. For  analysis  and  the  science  of  operations, see  MarieJose  Durand-Richard,  'Between  Science  and  Industry:  The  Principle  of  Analogy  and  the Mechanization  of  Operations',  in The  Interaction  between  echnology  nd Science,  ed.  B. GremT a men  (Wageningen,  1991), pp.  23-42.
- 7.  [Dionysius  Lardner],  'Babbage's  Calculating  Engine',  Edinburgh Review  59  (July 1834): 319.  For Lardner's collaboration  on  mechanical  notation  with  Babbage  and its  publicity  in Paris and  Berlin,  see  Babbage,  letter  to Charles  Dupin,  20  Dec.  1833  and  Babbage,  letter to Alexander  von  Humboldt,  Dec.  1833,  British  Library,  Add.  MSS 37188,  fols.  117,  123.
- 8. A. A.  Lovelace,  'Sketch of  the  Analytical Engine  Invented  by  Charles  Babbage  Esq. by  L. F.  Manabrea, of Turin,  Officer of the  Military Engineers,  with Notes  upon  the Memoir by  the  Translator', Scientific Memoirs  3  (1843):  690;  rpt.  as Sketch  f  the  Analytical  Engine,  in o The  Analytical  ngine  and  Mechanical  otation,  vol. 3 of The  Works  f  Charles  abbage,  d. Martin E N o B e Campbell-Kelly,  11  vols.  (New  York, 1989),  p.  89;  and  Maxine  Berg,  The  Machinery Question and the  Making  of  Political Economy  1815-1848 (Cambridge,  1980),  pp.  181,  183.
- 9.  Babbage,  On the  Economy  of Machinery  nd  Manufactures,  4th  ed.  (London, a 1835),  p. 120; hereafter  abbreviated E.

reinterpretation  of Adam Smith's notion  of the division of labour, and,  as he  emphasised,  the fundamental  principle  of that division which allowed the  sensitive  analytical  regulation of  the process  of  manufacture.  The 'Babbage principle',  as it came to be  known,  applied equally  to the  regulation of the  factory  and the  calculating  engines: o

The  master  manufacturer,  by dividing  the  work to be executed  into different processes, each  requiring different degrees of  skill  or  of force,  can  purchase  exactly  that  precise  quantity  of  both  which  is necessary  for each  process;  whereas if the whole work were executed by  one  workman,  that  person  must  possess  sufficient skill to  perform the most  difficult,  and sufficient  strength  to execute  the most laborious,  of the  operations  into which the art is divided.  [E, pp.  175-76]

As  Babbage  and  his  allies  among the  political  economists showed,  the disaggregation of  the  production process  into  its  simplest  components allowed  a series  of  economies  and  practices  of  surveillance.  Mechanised production  required  strict  discipline.  The  same was true of the  Analytical Engine.  Parcelling  the  processes  of  Lagrangean  algebra  into  specific  components  allowed the increase in  speed  of the machine,  the transformation of infinities of  space  into  manageable  durations of time,  the most economical  recompense to each  component  in terms of consumed  power  (if  mechanical)  or  consumed wages  (if  human). 'The  whole history of  the invention has  been a struggle against  time',  Babbage  wrote  in  1837 (M, p.  194).  The  replacement of  individual  human  intelligence  by  machine  intelligence  was as  apparent  in the  workshop  as in the  engines.  This task was both  politically  and  economically ecessary.  'One  great  advantage n which we derive from  machinery  is the check which it affords  against  the inattention,  idleness  or the  dishonesty  of human  agents' (E, p.  54).  Such failings  could  produce erroneous  results. This  was  why Babbage  was always  fascinated  by  French  Republican  attempts  of the  1790s to  compute new  logarithm  tables  by  an  ingenious division  of  the  labour  of teams  of subordinate  calculators. The  French  reported  that their  least  intelligent computers,  when  subject  to  the  right  management, were  the  most reliable. Unreliable  agents  could  also form trade union  combinations,  which, Babbage  held,  were  always 'injurious'  to the work force itself  (E, p.  297). His aim here was to contest the influence  of  'designing  persons'  and show the  working  classes that 'the  prosperity  and  success of the master manufacturer  is  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the  workman',  even  though 'this

10. Richard M.  Romano,  'The  Economic  Ideas  of Charles  Babbage', History  of  Political Economy  14  (Fall  1982):  391.  Marx's  response to  the Babbage  principle  can  be  found  in Capital:  'The  collective  worker  now  possesses  all the  qualities  necessary  for  production in an  equal degree  of  excellence,  and  expends them in the most economical  way' (C, p. 469).

connexion  is in  many  cases too remote  to be understood  by  the latter'  (E, pp.  230,  250-51)."

Babbage's political strategies  of the strife-ridden  decade  of the  1830s outlined  a crucial role  for  the  analytic manager.  The machinery  of  the factory  and  the  calculating  engines  precisely  embodied he  intelligence t of theory  and  abrogated  the individual  intelligence  of the worker.  Only  the superior  combination  and  correlation  of  each  component guaranteed  efficient,  economical,  planned,  and  therefore  intelligent  performance.  This abstract, lawlike behaviour  was  only  visible to the overseer-men such as Babbage.  No  doubt his own status as a  gentlemanly  specialist helped.  He inherited  one  hundred  thousand  pounds  from his banker father in  1827, while  the  state  spent  more  than  seventeen  thousand  pounds  on  his  engines  within  the  next  decade.  'The  efforts  for  the  improvement of  its manufactures  which  any country  can make with the  greatest  probability of  success',  he  argued  in his text on  machinery,  'must arise from the combined  exertions  of  all those  most  skilled  in  the  theory,  as well  as in  the practice  of the arts;  each  labouring  in that  department  for which his natural  capacity  and  acquired  habits rendered  him  most fit'  (E, p.  379).  Such declarations  made the new class of  managerial analysts  the  supreme  economic  managers  and  legislators  of  social  welfare.  In  good  Bonapartist style  Babbage  thought  they  should  be  rewarded  with  newfangled life peerages  and  political power.12  The  science of calculation became  the supreme  legislative discipline, just  as the  calculating engines  provided  both legislative  and executive  coordination.  This  political  and  managerial  language  was not  merely  an  elegant  reformist  metaphor  hatched  in  wealthy London  drawing  rooms.  The  calculating engines  were themselves  products  of  the system  of  automatic  manufacture  which  Babbage  sought  to model.  They  were  some  of  that  system's  most  famous  and  most  visible accomplishments.

## 2.  Shows  in the West  nd,  Skills  in Lambeth E

The  first automaton  which  Babbage  ever  saw, when  a  very  young visitor to the  backstage workshop  of a London  exhibitor,  was a danseuse,

- 11. The  first reference  to the  French  project  is in  Babbage,  A Letter  to  Humphry  Davy: On the  Application  of Machinery  o the  Purpose  of Calculating  nd  Printing  Mathematical  rinciples t a P (London, 1822),  p.  8;  rpt.  in  The  Difference  Engine  and Table Making,  vol.  2  of  The Works  f o Charles  abbage,  pp.  10-11.  Babbage got  a  copy  of these tables in Paris in  1819. See  UniverB sity  of  Cambridge  Library,  Add.  MSS 8705:37.  For other  responses  to the French work, see [Lardner],  'Babbage's Calculating  Engine', p.  275.
- 12.  See  Hyman,  Charles  Babbage:  Pioneer  of  the  Computer  (Princeton,  N.  J., 1982),  pp. 86-87,  and  M,  pp.  115,  111. For  Babbage  on  honours,  see  Babbage,  The  Exposition f  1851: o or, Views  on  the  ndustry,  he  Science,  nd  the  Government,  f  England (London,  1851), pp.  202-31; I t a o and  for the  Bonapartist  connexion, see  Babbage, Reflections  n the  Decline  of  Science  in  Engo land, and on Some  of  Its Causes  (London,  1830),  pp.  25-27.

a model  one  foot  high,  'her  eyes  ... full of  imagination,  and  irresistible'. Thirty years  later he  bought  the danseuse  at an auction sale of a  bankrupt mechanical show and,  after  restoring  its  gears, displayed  it at his  Marylebone  house  parties  alongside his  calculating  machines.'3 The  anecdote illuminates  the social site which the  calculating engines  occupied  as competitors  for  polite  attention  with  the  vast  array  of automata  and  mechanisms on  display  in the  London  showrooms.  In  early  1834 two models  of the Difference  Engine  itself were made  by  the instrument  designer  Francis  Watkins,  who  plied  his trade  as electrician  and  showman  at the Adelaide  Gallery,  the  leading London  showcase for new  engineering. When the  Engine  had  been  abandoned Babbage  insisted  'it should  be  placed where  the  public  can see  it'  (see  fig.  3).  It was  put  on  display  in  the  museum of  King's College  London.  Next  door, at the  Admiralty  Museum  in Somerset  House,  visitors could  view  Henry  Maudslay's  celebrated blockmaking machinery  designed  for the  Portsmouth  naval  dockyards.  These technical  systems  were  on  show as the  highest  achievements  of the  early Victorian machine  tool  industry.'4

Two salient  features  of  these  displays  mattered  for  Babbage's  own project.  First, the  systematisation  of machine  tool  production  was  highly charged politically.  Second,  this  process  demanded  the  reorganisation  of the  productive  body  and of the visible  space  in which it  performed.  The preeminent  example  was  provided  at  Portsmouth,  the  very  earliest  site at which  the  automatic  machine  tool  system  was  implemented. Between 1795  and  1807  the  entire  system  of  production of  pulley  blocks  for  the Royal Navy  was overhauled.  Traditionally  this  production  had relied  on specialised crafts  in woodworking and  milling  highly  resistant  to  line management  and control.  Military  force was used  to  discipline  the  work force  in  the  face of  mass  protests  against  changing this  craft culture.  As historians  Carolyn Cooper  and Peter  Linebaugh  have  explained,  the new production  line  system destroyed  and  reorganized  every  feature  of  production. Pulley  blocks  were  standardised  and  marked  to  prevent  traditional forms of recompense in kind, practices which were now condemned as  theft.  Standardised  machinists  replaced  specialist  craftsmen. Wood was  replaced by steam-driven,  all-metal  machinery  and  separate  artisan  tasks  embodied in purpose-built lathes  and clamps.  The protagonists of  this  reorganisation were  also  the  protagonists of  much wider social  change.  The  system  was  developed  by  Samuel  Bentham,  the inspector  of  naval  works,  who  in  collaboration  with  his brother  Jeremy had  already  introduced an  identical system  of  surveillance  in  Russian

- 13.  Babbage, Passages  from  the  Life of  a  Philosopher  (London, 1864),  p.  17.  See  also  pp. 365-67,  425-57, and  Hyman,  Charles  abbage,  p.175. B
- 14.  Quoted  in  Hyman,  Charles  abbage,  p.  192. For the 'block mill as tourist attraction', B see  Carolyn  Cooper,  'The  Portsmouth  System  of  Manufacture',  Technology  nd Culture 25 a (Apr. 1984):  213.  For Watkins's  models,  see Francis  Watkins,  letter to  Babbage,  15  Jan.  1834, British  Library,  Add.  MSS 37188,  fol.  160.

FIG.  3.-A small  portion  of  Babbage's  Difference Engine  No. 1.  Frontispiece  from Babbage, Passages  from  the  Life of  a  Philosopher  (Longman,  1864); rpt.  as vol.  11  of The Works of  Charles  abbage. B

<!-- image -->

Babbagc, dcl.

woodworking  schemes  in the  early  1780s,  a scheme  soon  to be known  as the  Panopticon.  The  engineering works  were  laid  out  by  Marc Brunel and  implemented  by  his  close  ally Maudslay.  These  were  the  men  who introduced  Clement  to  Babbage  and  the  men  who  made  this  system  of inspection,  regulation,  and line  production  a visible  exemplar  of rational management.15

Samuel  Bentham  and  his  colleagues made  Portsmouth  dockyard  a site  of  'incessant work' and  then  turned  it into  a tourist  attraction. The Portsmouth  team  argued  that  public  visibility  could  be  an  invaluable aspect of  their  industrial  reformation. Bentham  'considered  it  highly conducive  to  the  hastening of  the  introduction  of  a  general  System  of machinery  that  public  opinion should  be  obtained  in  its  favour,  and that  this  was  likely to  be more surely effected by  a display of  well arranged  machines'.  So  from  the  1810s  the  block  machinery  became  a common  resort  for interested  visitors. The  new  system  of  technological repression can  be  taken  as  exemplary of  the emergence of  the wage form  and  of  the productive labourer.  A  guidebook to  the dockyard commented that  'on  entering the  block  mill,  the spectator is  struck with the  multiplicity  of its movements  and the  rapidity  of its  operations'.16 The  impersonal  pronouns  in this account are  eloquent.  To see the automatic  world  as  a  system,  it  was  important not  to  see  the  work  force's culture.

The  London  machine  shows of the Difference  Engine  and the Portsmouth  lathes were  designed to win income  and  teach  important  lessons to a wide  range  of  publics.  This was not an audience  which knew  exactly what it wanted and  certainly  not an audience  that  obviously  wanted exactitude. Babbage  reckoned  that  automatic  systems  should yield  specific truths  about  the  relation among  intelligence, work,  and  mechanism. These  truths were  by  no means self-evident  or  uncontroversial,  especially during  the  machine-breaking  protests  which  raged  during  the  struggle for  Reform.  Babbage's  lessons  hinged on  the  proper  ownership  of  machinery  and  thus,  in  the  jargon of  his  favourite  science,  the  source  of productive  value.  The  rights  of  the  workers  to  the  whole  value  of  their labour  informed  much  of  the  radical  protest  of  these key  years.  Who should  'own' these machines? Whose labour did  they embody?  Reformist journalists were  persistently  struck  by  'the  systematic  way  in  which  the people proceeded', while the 'people' themselves protested against the  campaigns  'to make us tools' or 'machines'. These  issues made  urgent

- 15. See  Cooper,  'The Portsmouth  System  of  Manufacture', and Peter  Linebaugh,  'Ships and  Chips: Technological  Repression  and the  Origin  of the  Wage',  The  London  Hanged:  Crime and Civil  Society  n the  Eighteenth  Century  (Harmondsworth, i 1991),  pp.  371-401.
- 16.  Quoted in  Cooper,  'The  Portsmouth  System  of  Manufacture',  pp.  213,  214.  See also  Linebaugh,  The  London  Hanged, pp.  399-401.

the  problem  of the  source  and  ownership  of the  skills embodied  in  machines  confessedly  designed  to  perform  mental work."7

Working-class  interests  appealed  to traditional custom  in which skill was  recognized as  a  property inherent in  the persons of  the  workers themselves.  Skill was reckoned  to be  scarcely  communicable  outside  carefully  controlled  milieux  which  were  designed to  remain  opaque  to  the surveillance  of  managers and  inspectors. Thus  attempts  by  observers such  as  Babbage  to  gather  intelligence about  machines  and  the  work force were  politically  controversial.  In contrast to the  traditional  model, philosophers of  machinery  promoted an  account  of  rational  valuation, attempting  to render  the labour  process transparent  and skills rather easily  measurable  in  the  marketplace  of  wage  labour. These  are  the  early nineteenth-century English  conflicts  which,  following E. P.  Thompson, we now  typically  associate with  political  economic  campaigns  against  the Corn Laws and the  customary  moral  economy  of the  grain  rioters, where economic  rationality  fought  with  traditional  forms  of  exchange, or,  following  Michel  Foucault,  with  Benthamite  strategies  for the  surveillance of the  body  in the  illuminated  spaces  of the  Panopticon.  Babbage's  campaigns  for machine  intelligence  take their  place alongside  these  more familiar  strategies  for the  reconfiguration  of the  productive  body. 18

In  this  context, the  faculties  of  memory and  foresight  with  which Babbage sought  to endow  the  Analytical Engine  also characterize his selfpresentation  as the  unique  author of the machine.  They  embodied is conh trol over the  engine  while  they  disembodied  he skills and  camouflaged  the t work force on which it  depended. He  explained  his view of the  property of  skill involved  in  the  calculating  engines in  an  appeal  regarding their future  to the  Duke  of  Wellington  in late  1834.  'My right  to  dispose,  as I will,  of such inventions  cannot be contested;  it is more sacred in its nature than  any hereditary  or  acquired  property,  for  they  are the  absolute  creations of  my  own mind'.19  This remarkable declaration followed a decade of strife with  Clement,  the brilliant  (but  here  characteristically unnamed) engineer on  whose  work  so  much  of  the engine's development depended. When  the  project  was  inaugurated  Babbage  had  to  work  out whether  the  design was  in  'such  a  form  that  its  execution [might  be] within the reach of a skilful workman'. This in turn  prompted  his imme-

- 17.  Quoted in  E.  P.  Thompson, The  Making of  the  English Working Class  (Harmondsworth,  1968),  pp.  889,  915.  See  also  John Rule,  The  Labouring  Classes  in  Early  Industrial England,  1750-1850 (London,  1986),  pp.  357-63.
- 18. See  Thompson, 'The Moral  Economy  of the  English  Crowd in the  Eighteenth  Century',  Past  and Present  50  (Feb.  1971):  76-136  and  Customs  n Common  New  York, 1991),  pp. i ( 184-351;  Foucault,  Discipline  and Punish,  pp.  133-338  and  'The  Eye  of  Power', Michel  Foucault:  Power/Knowledge,  rans.  Colin  Gordon  et  al.,  ed.  Gordon  (New  York, 1980),  pp. t 14665.  For  customary  skill,  see  Rule,  'The  Property  of  Skill in  the  Period  of  Manufacture',  in The  Historical Meanings  of  Work, d.  Patrick  Joyce  (Cambridge,  1987),  pp.  99-118. e
- 19.  Babbage,  letter  to Arthur  Wellesley,  1st Duke  of  Wellington,  23  Dec.  1834,  British Library,  Add.  MSS 40611,  fol.  181.

diate  examination 'in detail'  of  'machinery  of  every  kind'.  Fights  were endemic  about  Babbage's  claims  that  the  work  force  should  submit  to, and  only  needed  slavishly  to follow, his detailed  recipe  for the  calculating engines and  that  any  results  of  this  labour  would belong to Babbage himself.20

Babbage's specifications  placed  unprecedented demands  on  the  capacities  of the machine  tool  workshops  and soon turned  those  workshops into  revolutionary  sites of innovation  and  training.  An  1829  Royal Society report  on  the  engine  plans  conceded  that  'in all those  parts  of  the  Machine  where  the  nicest  precision  is  required, the wheelwork  only brings them  by  a first  approximation  (though  a  very  nice  one),  to their destined places: they  are then  settled into accurate  adjustment by peculiar  contrivances, which admit of no shake or latitude of  any  kind'  (quoted  in  M,  p. 86). The troublesome  terms in these bland remarks  by  the  gentlemen  of science were the references  to nice  precision,  accurate  adjustment,  and shake or latitude. What  might  seem to a savant matters of irrational  judgment  were the  key aspects  of the  customary  culture of the  workshop.  What  might  seem to the  Royal Society  and  the  Treasury  to  be  worthless  or  exorbitant  demands from the  workshop  staff would  appear  within the machine  shop  as legitimate  and  self-evident  expectations of  machinists' status. The  fights between  Clement  and  Babbage  which  raged  between  1822 and  1834 testified to the  fury  and  significance  of these  issues of control.

Two critical  problems  haunted  the  work on  the  calculating  engines. First,  the  place of  skill and  the  social and  cognitive  distance  between  designers,  machinists, and  draughtsmen  were vital for the  project's  conduct. When  Babbage  set out on a  European  tour in  1828 he left Clement  what he  reckoned  were  'sufficient  drawings  to  enable  his  agents  to  proceed with the construction  of the Difference  Engine  during  his  absence'(M, p. 81).  Such written  recipes  soon  proved  hopelessly  inadequate.  Two  years later,  on  his  return,  Babbage  demanded  that the  engine  construction  site be  moved  from Clement's works in Lambeth  to  Babbage's  own house  in Marylebone.  Clement  demanded  huge  compensation,  did not  get  it, and sacked his men. Jarvis, Clement's ex-draughtsman and the future codesigner of  the  Analytical  Engine,  explained to Babbage  why  it was important  that  work  proceed 'under  your  immediate inspection':  'You might  be  at  once appealed  to,  whenever  it  was  found very  difficult  to produce  nearly  [the desired]  effect-which is a  very  common  case in machinery'.  The  lesson  is a familiar one.  The  production  and  reproduction of skills and material  technology  requires  intense  and immediate  interaction in  spaces specifically designed  for the  purpose.  Such  designs  violated the conventions  by which the machinists  plied  their  trade.2'

- 20.  Babbage,  'The Science  of Number  Reduced  to  Mechanism',  in M,  p.  65.
- 21.  C. G.  Jarvis,  letter  to  Babbage,  quoted  in  Hyman,  Charles  abbage,  p.  131. See  also B James  Nasmyth, James Nasmyth,  Engineer:  An  Autobiography,  d.  Samuel  Smiles  (London, e 1883),  p.  130. For the move  to  Marylebone,  see  Babbage,  letter to  Joseph  Clement,  18  May

A second  decisive  problem  for the  engine  project  was therefore  the issue of  ownership  nd  public knowledge.  The costs of the work were tradia tionally  in the hands of the  engineer  while his tools,  in this case the  lathes, planes,  and  vices,  were  always  his  own  property.  Thus  the  question  of whether  the Difference  Engine  was itself a tool became moot.  From 1829 Babbage  and Clement were in  dispute  about  property  and  prices.  Clement  at once  appealed to  the  customs  of  his craft: all the  tools,  especially the new  self-acting  lathes,  belonged  exclusively  to him and he insisted on his  right  to make more  calculating engines  without  Babbage's permission. Once  again, Jarvis explained  the  point  to the infuriated  mathematician:

It  should  be borne  in mind  that the  inventor  of a machine  and  the maker of it have two distinct ends  to obtain. The  object  of the first is to make the  machine  as  complete  as  possible.  The  object  of the  second-and we  have  no  right  to  expect he  will be  influenced  by any other  feeling-is to  gain  as much as  possible by making  the  machine, and it is in his interest  to make it as  complicated  as  possible.22

Babbage's  characteristic solution was to  propose  the nationalisation of the engine, the  tools,  and  the  designs. He  was  pursuing  what he  reckoned was the  practical logic  of much of the machine tool  industry. Outstanding initiatives,  such  as the  development of  precision  tools  at Greenwich  Observatory  and  the  installation  of  the  Portsmouth  block-making  system, were state-funded  projects, part  of the  activity  of what has been  labelled the  'fiscal-military  state',  involving  large-scale military  investment,  a major  financial  bureaucracy,  and commitment  to the accumulation  of  quantitative  information  about  civil  society.  Babbage's  machine intelligence was  designed  to  appeal  to,  and  reinforce,  these  rather  fragile  interests.23 In  the  Lambeth  machine  shops  personal  skill and  thus  individual  property  was at stake in  every  'improved' design  and  workshop  layout.  Once the  engine had  been  nationalised  and  shifted  to  Babbage's  own  workshop,  it was  proposed  that  Jarvis  work there but remain under  Clement's management. Clement  refused  the  deal  because  'my plan  may  be  fol-

1832,  British  Library,  Add.  MSS  37186,  fol.  400.  For the  machine  tool  culture,  see  K. R. Gilbert,  'Machine Tools', in  History  of Technology,  d.  Charles  Singer  et  al.,  8 vols.  (Oxford, e 1954-84), 4:417-41, and  A. E.  Musson,  Joseph Whitworth  and  the  Growth  of  Massproduction  Engineering',  Business  History  17  (July 1975):  109-49.

22.  Jarvis,  letter  to  Babbage,  Feb.  1831,  British  Library  Add.  MSS 37185,  fol. 419.  See also  Hyman,  Charles  abbage,  pp.  124,  128. The  best discussion  of the  fight  with Clement  is B William Ginn, Philosophers  nd Artisans:  The  Relationship  etween a b Men  of  Science  and Instrument Makers  in London  1820-1860 (Ph.D. diss.,  University  of  Kent,  1991), pp. 157-69.

23.  For state standardisation,  see  Julian Hoppit,  'Reforming  Britain's  Weights  and Measures,  1660-1824',  English  Historical  Review  (Jan. 1993): 82-104;  for the  fiscal-military  state, see  John  Brewer, The  Sinews  of  Power: War,  oney,  and the  English  State  (London,  1989). M

lowed without  my being  in  any way  a  gainer',  and  Jarvis  refused  because he  would  not  become  'party  to  my  own  degradation'.  Babbage  and  his Royal Society  allies  judged this rational  management,  while the  engineers often  saw it as a  challenge  to their  rights  and  skills.24

Babbage's  early  projects  collapsed under  the  force  of  these  challenges.  But his  campaign  for machine  intelligence  and the automatic  system  successfully captured  the interests of the  engineering  managers  and their new  system.  The  intelligence  gathered  for his work on manufacture offered  important  lessons  about  wage  rates and  skill  patterns.  First, the engineers  were  prepared  to value the  calculating  engine  project by  raising  the  wages  of workmen who had been involved  in the scheme.  Second, they  were  committed  to  the  design of  increasingly  automated systems which  would  break  down  craft divisions  and  allow  the  employment of increasingly  cheap  hands  and  increasingly  subordinate  labour  processes. In  a  telling  annotation  to his  correspondence with  Wellington,  Babbage remarked  that  'I have  been  informed by  men  who  are  now  scattered about in our  manufacturing  districts,  that  they  all  get higher  wages  than their fellow workmen  in  consequence  of  having  worked at that machine'. Babbage's  informant  was  Richard  Wright,  first  employed as  Babbage's valet,  then  based  near  Maudslay  in  Lambeth,  who  toured  the  northern factories  for  Babbage's  book  and  ended up  in  Manchester  working  for Joseph Whitworth,  who  had  just left  the Difference Engine  project. 'There  is much  talk about  the  [calculating]  Machine  here',  Wright  told Babbage,  'so much  so  that  a  man  who  has  worked  at  it  has  a  greater chance  of the  best  work and  I am  proud  to  say  that  I am  getting  more wages  than  any  other workman in the  Factory'.  Wright  offered  himself to Babbage  as a  possible  master  engineer.  He  became  a Smilesian  paragon who reckoned  that rational  management  and  the careful surveillance  of the division of labour  provided  the  key  to success in  making  the calculating  engines.  Wright explained to  Babbage  how  the  new  system  should work:

The  man  you  select  for  the  workshop  ought  to  be  a  good  general workman both at Vice and Lathe for such a man can see  by  the  way a man  begins ajob  whether  he will finish it in a workmanlike manner or  not.  Perhaps you  are  not  quite  aware  that  at  Mr Clement's  and most other  Factories the work is divided  into the branches  Vice and Lathe,  and  in  most  cases  the  man  who  works  at the  one  is  nearly ignorant  of  the  other.... He  ought  above  all  to  have  studied  the dispositions  of workmen  so as to  keep  the  workshop  free  from contention  and  disorder  and  the  causes  of  the  repeated  failures  of  so much  new  Machinery  for I am sure  there  is more  failures  through

24.  Jarvis,  letter  to  Babbage,  quoted  in  Hyman,  Charles Babbage,  p.  132.  See also  Babbage,  letter to  Wellington, July  1834,  in  M,  pp.  104-5.

waste  of  labour  and  bad  management than  there  is  through bad schemes  or  any  other  cause.25

Wright's  was the  anonymous  voice  recorded  in  the  pages  of  Babbage's Economy  of Machinery  and  which  this text  helped make  representative  of the automatic  system.  In the  philosophy  of manufacture  much was made of  the  highly  personal skills embodied  in  the  master  engineers. In  his travel notes  for the  engine  survey, Babbage  recorded  that 'causes of failure'  should  be  found  by consulting a  'man of  science  on  the  principle' and  'a  practical  engineer on  mechanical  difficulties'.  It  was  acknowledged, and  celebrated,  that  manual  dexterity  remained  a central  attribute of 'the skilled workman'.  Babbage  reckoned  that 'the first  necessity' for his Difference  Engine  was 'to  preserve  the  life of  Mr Clement.  . . .  It would be  extremely  difficult if not  impossible  to find  any  other  person  of equal  talent both  as a draftsman and  as a mechanician'.  Engine  masters became heroes.  But,  crucially,  these virtues were to be  increasingly  vested in  the  standardised  tool  kit  of  the  machine shops. No  doubt  this  was why  the  authoritative  scales  and  tools  in  use  were  so  often  fetishised. Maudslay's  bench top scale  was  'humourously called ... "The  Lord Chancellor"', while  his  colleagues  boasted  of  'the  progeny of  legitimate descendants' which  they  had  produced.26

In  industrialising  Britain the  systems  these  men  helped  forge  were the sites of a new  managerial  and technical  network,  dependent as much on  strenuous  regulation  of the  labour  process  as on  the  development of new  automatic  machinery.  In  the  process,  craft customs  were  subverted and  standardised,  accurate  production  secured.27 The  managers  of  the most advanced  workshops eventually  became  Babbage's  closest allies and sources of  intelligence  and  support.  In his  Economy f Machinery  Babbage o made much of the means  through  which the lathe would  guarantee  'identity'  and  'accuracy',  and then  accounted  accuracy  as an  economy  of  time, since  'it would  be  possible  for a  very  skilful  workman,  with files and  polishing  substances',  to  produce  a  perfect  surface  (E, pp.  66-67). So artisan skill could  be  transmuted  into  its  wage  equivalent.  Babbage's  friend  the dissenting mathematician  Augustus  de  Morgan  brilliantly  summarised the  relation  between  the  lathe,  emblem  of automatic  skill, and  Babbage, master  of  mechanical analysis,  in  a  cartoon showing  him  at  the  lathe

25.  Richard  Wright,  letters to  Babbage,  18  June 1834 and  13  Jan.  1839,  British  Library, Add.  MSS  37188,  fol.  390  and  Add.  MSS  37191,  fols.  99-100; compare  Hyman,  Charles Babbage,  pp.  66,  107.

26.  Babbage,  'Notes  for  Economy  of  Manufacture',  University  of  Cambridge  Library, Add.  MSS 8705:25,  p.  10;  Babbage,  'Report  on  the  Calculating  Machine'  (1830),  British Library,  Add.  MSS 37185,  fol.  264;  and  Nasmyth,James Nasmyth,  Engineer;  pp.  148-49, 179. Compare  Ginn, Philosophers  nd  Artisans,  p.  167,  on  the  uniqueness  of artisan skill. a

27.  See  John  Foster,  Class  Struggle  nd the  Industrial  Revolution:  arly  Industrial a E Capitalism in Three  nglish  Towns  London,  1974),  pp.  224-25,  and  Ian Inkster,  Science  and  Technology E ( in History:  n  Approach  o  Industrial A t Development  (London,  1991),  pp.  82-83.

FIG. 4.-Cartoon by Augustus  de  Morgan  of  Babbage  at a  lathe,  21  Oct.  1839.  From British  Library,  Add.  MSS 37191,  fol. 257.

<!-- image -->

armed  only  with  a  series  of  logarithmic functions  (see  fig.  4).  On  this showing  mechanical  analysis  was  just  like  the  work  of  automated  tools, but  it also  provided the  key  resource  for  managing  the  development of the  new  factory system.28

## 3. From  London  to  Manchester:  ouring  he  Factory ystem T t S

The  factory system  was first  represented  in a  powerful  series  ofjournalistic  reports  in  the  1830s  and  1840s,  of  which  Friedrich  Engels's  The

28.  See  Charles Holtzapffel, Turning  and Mechanical  Manipulation,  5  vols.  (London, 1846-84),  2:984-91; Nasmyth,  letter to  Babbage,  22  June  1855; and  Babbage,  letter to  Joseph  Whitworth,  July  1855,  British  Library,  Add.  MSS 37196,  fols.  249,  366.  The  cartoon is in  Augustus  de  Morgan,  letter to  Babbage,  21 Oct.  1839,  British  Library,  Add. MSS 37191, fol. 257.

Condition  of  the  Working Class in  England  is  only the  most  notoriousthough  certainly  one  of the more  perceptive.  Babbage's  work on  political economy  and on machine  intelligence  took its  place  in this  genre  of works which  were  both  products  of  well-publicised  tours  of  the  workshops  and also  producers  f  intelligence o about  the  factory system.  Berg  emphasises that 'the  factory system  itself was a term which  frequently  hid more  than it  revealed'.29  Babbage's  tours  were  no  exception. His  was  one  of  the handbooks  with which  factory  tourists were  supplied.  Other  representative  texts  included  The  Philosophy f Manufactures,  produced o in  1835  by the  Scottish  consulting  chemist Andrew  Ure  with  the  same  publisher  as Babbage's  work,  and  reports  on  the  Lancashire  factories,  produced in the  1840s  by  the  Irish  journalist William  Cooke  Taylor.  In  their  wellmarketed  texts,  the  factory guides  emphasised  that inside  the  automatic system  tourists  would  see  those  'admirable  adaptations  of  human  skill and  intelligence'  by  which  'we are  giving  to  the  present  age  its  peculiar and  wonderful  characteristic,  namely,  the  triumph of  mind  over  matter'.30  This  triumph  was at once  a claim about  the  machine  tool  system, and thus the control  of matter  by  human  intelligence,  and a claim about labour  discipline,  and  thus  the  control  of  the  work force  by  its masters. Ure  stressed the relation between  'the automatic  plan'  and  'the  equalization of labour'. 'The  grand object  therefore  of the modern  manufacturer is,  through the  union  of  capital  and  science,  to  reduce  the  task of  his work-people  to the  exercise  of  vigilance  and  dexterity'.  It was  precisely for this reason  that in his tours Ure  judged the  factory  a form of laboratory,  a  potentially  utopian  site devoid  of strife and  replete  with scientific truth.  'The  science  of  the  factory'  was  at  once  a  means  of  disciplining labour and an  object  lesson  in thermal  physics  'better studied  in a week's residence  in Lancashire than in a session of  any university  in  Europe' (see fig.  5).  A Manchester  guidebook  explained that the  self-acting  principle applied  to slide control  in  machine  lathes  'is that which  enables  a  child, or the  machine  tself  to  operate  on  masses of  metal,  and  to cut  shavings  off i iron,  as if it was  deprived  of all  hardness,  and  so  mathematically  correct that even Euclid himself  might  be the workman!'  (MA,  pp. 217-18n).  The tour  guides  agreed  that  accuracy  was both demanded  by,  and a corrective to,  labour  resistance.  'The  frequent  and  insufferable  annoyances  which

29.  Berg,  The  Age of Manufactures  700-1820 1 (London,  1985), p.  229.  For  factory  tourism,  see  Steven  Marcus,  Engels, Manchester, and the  Working  lass  (New  York, 1985),  pp.  30C 66,  and  Francis D.  Klingender,  Art  and the  Industrial  Revolution  (London,  1972),  pp.  109-17. 30. Manchester s It  Is;  or  Notices  f  the  Institutions, a o Manufactures,  Commerce, ailways,  etc.,  of R the  Metropolis f Manufactures  (1839;  Manchester,  1971), p.  271n;  hereafter  abbreviated MA. o For  Manchester  and  machine  tools,  see  Musson,  'Joseph  Whitworth  and  the  Growth  of Mass-production  Engineering',  p.  113. For Chartist demonstrations  in Manchester, see Dorothy  Thompson, The Chartists:  opular  Politics  in the Industrial  Revolution  (Aldershot,  1984), P pp.  57-76, and  Nasmyth, James Nasmyth,  Engineer,  pp.  222-28. Ure's  personal  connexion with  Babbage  is revealed  in  George  Evans,  letter to  Babbage,  16 Feb.  1835,  British  Library, Add.  MSS 37189,  fol.  17, where  Ure asks to see the Difference  Engine  in  person.

.

i

:

IT.

,+,\_;-  ::-

etc..,+

+

1 6 1

1  1

.-

......L

INTERS

WITH

PRINTE

and title  page  from Manchester s It  Is;  or  Notices  of  the  Institutions,

of Manufactures  (1839;  Manchester,  1971).

Manuf

FIG.  .--Frontispiece 5

<!-- image -->

1 1 1 5 1 6 ;  L 1

2

8

3

6

1 5

1

nw  Ak

8

{

engineers  have  experienced from trades unions'  produced  'those admirable  contrivances  which  are  enabling mechanicians  to  perform such wonders in  overcoming  the resistance of the material world'  (MA,  p. 33).31 In  their  accounts  of  this  resistance,  a characteristic series  of  themes  was developed in  the  literature  of factory  tourism.  The apparently  overwhelming  power  of  the  works  should  rightly  be  understood as  labour discipline  within  a  system  of  division  and  coordination producing  geometrical  precision  out of mere manual skill in  despite  of  proletarian  resistance.

Even if the  factory  were the  consequence  of the  adoption  of the automatic  system,  it was still  necessary  but difficult  to  represent  the  inmates of  the  factory  as themselves  possessed  of  intelligence. The  puzzle  of  the thinking  machine was the  very  stuff of this debate.  No doubt this was  why the  images  of the modern  Prometheus  and of Athena  springing  fully  clad from  the  mind  of  Zeus  were  so  common  in  tourists'  analyses.  Had  not Mary Shelley,  in  1818,  subtitled  her Frankenstein  he modern  Prometheus?32 t Defining  the site of  intelligence was a  key political  task. Critics reiterated their  suspicion  that automatic  machinery  and  factory discipline  mechanized  the  proletariat.  Cooke  Taylor  addressed  the  puzzle  directly:  'I am willing  to confess  that the mechanical  processes  which  require  a continuous and  unvarying  repetition  of the same  operation  ... have a  tendency to  degrade  the workman into an automaton'.  He conceded  that 'there is a  tendency  in  the  use  of  machinery  to  materialize  the  thoughts'.  But  in drawing  a  picture  of the balance between  the  necessary  division of labour and  the  combination  of  tasks  required  within  the  factory system,  he  insisted  that 'such combination  requires  no  small exercise  of mind  and  no conceivable  adaptation  of  wood  and  iron  will  produce a  machine  that can think'.33

There  was thus  an  unresolved  contradiction  between  stress on  the subordination  and  thus  mechanization  of  workers'  intelligence and  on the  coordination  and  thus  cerebration  of  their  labour. A  notorious  example appeared  in Ure's  attempts  to define  the term  factory.  On the  very same  page  of  his  Philosophy  of Manufactures  he  defined  the  factory  both as  'a vast  automaton,  composed of  various  mechanical  and  intellectual

- 31. Andrew  Ure,  The  Philosophy f Manufactures  (London,  1835), pp.  21, 20-21,  25.  On o Manchester strikes and  technical  innovation  in  1837,  compare  William Pole,  with Sir William  Fairbairn, The  Life of  Sir William  Fairbairn  (London,  1877),  p.  163. Further evidence  is available in  Technology  nd  Toil  in  Nineteenth-Century  ritain,  ed.  Berg  (London, a B 1979),  especially p.  159.
- 32.  For this  debate,  see  Tine  Bruland,  'Industrial  Conflict  as  a  Source  of  Technical Innovation:  Three  Cases',  Economy  nd  Society  11  (May 1982): 91-121, a and William Lazonick,  'Industrial  Relations  and  Technical  Change:  The  Case of  the  Self-acting  Mule',  Cambridge ournal  of  Economics   (Sept.  1979): 231-62.  For the Promethean  and Athenian  images, J 3 see  Ure,  Philosophy f Manufactures,  p.  367. o
- 33.  William Cooke  Taylor,  Notes  of  a Tour  in the  Manufacturing  Districts  f Lancashire,  2d o ed.  (London,  1842),  pp.  126,  139 and Factories nd the  Factory ystem  (London,  1844), p.  3. a S

organs,.., all  of  them being  subordinated  to  a  self-regulated  moving force' and as 'the combined  operation  of  many  orders of  work-people  ... in  tending  with assiduous  skill a series  of  productive  machines'.34  Marx immediately  picked  up  this  striking  contradiction  between  automatism and  skill and  associated  it  closely  with  Babbage's  account  of the  division of labour in the machine  system.  'These two  descriptions  [by Ure]  are far from  being  identical.  In  one,  the combined  collective  worker  appears  as the dominant  subject [iibergreifendes  ubjekt],  nd the mechanical automaS a ton as the  object;  in the  other,  the automaton  itself is the  subject,  and the workers are  merely  conscious  organs'(C, p.  544).  The  'automatic workshop' posed  in an  unprecedentedly acute form the  challenge  of  situating its intellectual  and thus  governing  principle  within the skilful work  force, as  Cooke  Taylor  hinted, within  the managerial  regime, as  managers themselves  so  often  claimed,  or  within  the  machines,  as  Ure  and  Babbage  boasted.35

This  problem  of the  geography  of  intelligence  depended on the fetishisation  of  machines  and  the  reification  of  the  labour  power  exerted around  them.  Under  the  new orthodoxies  of  political economy,  the  surplus  value  extracted  from  the  machines  was the  product  of  the  intelligence  of  capital  made  real in  the  force  of steam-driven  engines. On this showing,  intelligence itself was  easily  identified  with  just  those  qualities displayed  by manufacturing  capital  and  the  subordinate  'servants of the machine',  notably foresight  and  vigilance.  As we have  seen,  these  were also the  virtues which  Babbage  reckoned  made his  engines  think. The  aim of this  polemic  was to  make  the  identity  of  intelligence and  capitalist  machine management self-evident. Socialist,  radical,  and plebeian critics sought,  in  contrast,  to  make it nonsensical  or disastrous.  This  made  the problem of  workers'  intelligence vital  in political debate.  The pervasiveness of the  language  of machine  intelligence  was most marked in the more  sophisticated  socialist  analyses,  for in these texts claims for the liberation of the  proletariat  from the subordination  of  factory discipline  simultaneously  used,  and  assumed,  the  image  of  the  human  body  as  'living machinery'. Engels  reckoned  that in Manchester the  process  which mechanized  the  very  bodies  and minds of the work force would also radicalize their  politics despite  he  capitalists' power.  Machine  systems helped  divide t the  body  into  specialised,  monstrous  capacities.  'No  activity  ... claims the operative's thinking  powers'.  He  straightforwardly rejected  the meliorist claims of Cooke  Taylor, Ure,  and  their  colleagues  that machine  superintendence  was  a  form  of  leisure.  It  was  rather  a  form  of  tedium.  'The operative is  condemned to  let  his physical  and  mental  powers  decay', Engels added; 'if  the  operatives  have, nevertheless,  not  only  rescued  their

- 34.  Ure,  Philosophy f Manufactures,  p.  13 and  MA, p.  207. o
- 35.  Marx had  already  discussed  Ure's  Philosophy f Manufactures  in  Poverty  of Philosophy o (pp.  136-38) and  in  Grundrisse  p.  690),  where  it is linked  with  Babbage's Economy  of  Ma-( chinery.

intelligence but  cultivated  and  sharpened it  more  than  other  workingmen,  they  have found  this  possible only  in rebellion  against  their fate and the bourgeoisie'.36

Such  remarks  indicate  the  need  to  legitimate  the  discourse  on  the factory system produced  in the  1830s and  1840s and its  polemical  vocabulary  of machine  intelligence.  The  processes  of automation and coordination which had  spawned  the  factory system  had made the  problem  of the place  of  intelligence  urgent.  Proponents  of machinofacture  reckoned  that the  factory system  was  evidently  a  consequence of  intelligent reason and thus  providential  and virtuous.  They  situated this  intelligence  in the complex  relation  between  the  fixed  capital  of  the  steam-driven  engines and the  mental  capital  of  the  mill  owners.  The  work  force  itself  was  only judged a  producer  of  value  to  the  extent  that  it  matched  precisely  the capacities  of  the  machines.  The qualities  attributed  to  this  intelligence were  just  those  required  from  this form  of  superintendence-anticipation and meticulous  scrutiny.  This was the definition  of  intelligence  which Babbage  embodied  in  his  machines  and  the  sense  of  intelligence  which he  reckoned  those machines  displayed.  He even  claimed  that these were the virtues of  divinity.

## 4. From  London  to  Paradise:  The Apotheosis f  Machine o Intelligence

It  was,  perhaps,  inevitable that  Babbage  should  ultimately  teach  the supreme  value of machines  possessed  of  foresight  and  memory by  attributing  these  powers  to the  Deity.  Natural  theology  was the  indispensable medium  through  which  early  Victorian savants broadcast their  messages. The  dominant  texts of this  genre  were the  eight Bridgewater  reatises  roT p duced  in  the  early  1830s  by  eminent  divines  and  natural  philosophers under  the  management  of  the  Royal Society.  The  treatise  produced  by William Whewell,  then  mathematics  tutor at  Trinity College  Cambridge, was  among  the most successful of these works and included  a claim about the  relation  between  mathematics,  automatism,  and  atheism which Babbage  decided  he had to answer. His machine  philosophy  was here assailed from  a  perspective in  complete contrast  to  that  of  the  radical  artisans. Whewell  maintained  a consistent  hostility  to  the  implications  of  mechanised  analysis:  'We  may  thus  ... deny  to  the  mechanical  philosophers

36.  Friedrich  Engels,  The  Condition  f  the  Working  lass  in  England,  ed.  Eric Hobsbawm o C (London,  1969),  pp.  204-5. For the connexion  with intensification  of  labour, see  Raphael Samuel,  'The  Workshop  of the World: Steam Power and Hand  Technology  in mid-Victorian Britain',  History  WorkshopJournal    (Spring  1977): 6-72,  esp.  40;  and for the connexion  with 3 socialist  analysis  of  skill,  see Linebaugh,  'Labour  History  without  the  Labour  Process: A Note  on  John  Gast and His Times',  Social  History  7  (Oct.  1982):  319-28.

and  mathematicians  of  recent  times  any  authority  with  regard  to  their views of the administration  of the universe'. Worse was to follow. Whewell brutally  denied  that mechanised  analytical  calculation was  proper  to the formation  of  the  academic  and  clerical  elite.  In  classical  geometry 'we tread  the  ground ourselves  at  every  step  feeling ourselves  firm',  but  in machine  analysis  'we are carried  along  as in a rail-road  carriage, entering it  at one  station,  and  coming  out  of it at  another.... It is  plain  that  the latter is not  a mode  of  exercising  our own locomotive  powers.  ... It  may be the best  way  for men  of business  to  travel,  but it cannot  fitly  be  made a  part  of the  gymnastics  of  education'.37

These remarks  were  direct  blows  to Babbage's  programme. He called  the  reply  to  Whewell  he  produced in  1837  the  Ninth  Bridgewater Treatise  and  labelled  it  'a  fragment'.  It  amounted to  a  confession  of  his faith that the  established  intellectual  order  was  incompetent,  dangerous, and  innumerate. Babbage  had  shown  that  memory  and  foresight  were the  two  features  of  intelligence represented in  his  machines.  He  now showed  that  these  features  of  machine intelligence were  all  that  was needed  to understand  and model  the rule of  God,  whether  based on the miraculous  work of  the  Supreme  Intelligence or  on  His  promise  of  an afterlife.  Foresight  could  be  shown  to  be  responsible for  all  apparently miraculous  and  specially providential  events  in nature.  Throughout the 1830s  Babbage regaled  his  guests  with a  portentous  party  trick. He could set  the  machine  to  print  a series  of  integers  from  unity  to  one  million. Any  observer of the machine's  output  would assume that this series would -continue  indefinitely.  But the  initial  setting  of the  machine  could  be  adjusted so  that  at a certain  point  the  machine  would  advance  in  steps  of ten  thousand.  An  indefinite number  of  different  rules  might  be  programmed  this  way.  To the  observer, each  discontinuity  would  seem to be a  'miracle',  an  event  unpredictable from  the  apparent  lawlike course  of the  machine.  Yet in  fact the  manager  of the  system  would  have  given  it foresight.38 His  onlookers,  Charles Darwin  among  them,  were  almost always impressed.  Visitors 'went to  see  the  thinking  machine  (for  such  it seems)'  and  were  treated  to  Babbage's  miraculous  show  of  apparently sudden  breaks  in  its  output. 'There  was  a  sublimity  in  the  views  thus opened of  the  ultimate  results  of  intellectual power',  one  onlooker  reported.  A few  streets  away,  Darwin  learnt  his  lesson  and  set  out  to  use Babbage's system  as an  analogue  for the  origin  of  species by  natural law

37.  William  Whewell,  Astronomy  nd General  Physics  Considered  ith  Reference  o Natural a w t Theology  (London, 1834),  p.  334  and  Of  a Liberal  Education  in General  (London, 1845),  pp. 40-41. See  also  Richard  Yeo,  'William  Whewell,  Natural  Theology and  the  Philosophy  of Science in  mid-Nineteenth-century Britain',  Annals  of  Science  36  (Sept.  1979): 493-516, and Walter F. Cannon,  'The  Problem of  Miracles in the  1830s',  Victorian  Studies  4  (Sept.  1960): 5-32.

38.  See  Babbage,  Ninth  Bridgewater  reatise, d ed.  (London,  1838), pp.  32-43. T 2

without divine intervention.  Here,  then,  was the natural  equivalent  of the systematic gaze.  In answer to Whewell's boast that  only  induction  might reveal the divine  plan  of the world and that machine  analysis  could never do so,  Babbage  countered  that the world could be  represented  as an automatic  array only  visible as a  system  from the  point  of view of its  manager. The  world  system  was a  macroscopic  version  of a  factory,  the  philosophy of machinery  was  the  true  path  to  faith,  and  the  calculating  engines' power  of 'volition and  thought'  revealed  to all.39

Babbage  was  not  content  with  making  mechanisable  foresight  responsible  for all  apparently  miraculous and  specially providential  events. Mechanisable  memory  was to be associated with the doctrine  of a future state of rewards and  punishments.  'We must  possess  the  memory  of what we did  during  our  existence  in order  to  give  them  those  characteristics. In  fact,  memory  seems  to be  the  only  faculty  which  must of  necessity  be preserved in  order  to  render  a  future  state  possible'.  With  this  model Babbage  managed  to  show  that  just  those  features  of  intelligence displayed  in  his machine  were  also  required  for rational  religion.  Without memory,  there  could  be  no  heaven  or  hell  and,  without  foresight, no providence.40 The  apotheosis  of  the  intelligent machine  was an  integral part  of  Babbage's  ambitious  programme.  This  programme  has been used here  to illuminate  the  complex character of  systematic  vision  in  the  Industrial Revolution.  In the Ninth  Bridgewater  reatise,  he  system  was coexT t tensive with the  universe,  and  Babbage explained  that its order and  logic would  only  be  visible from  a  privileged  point  of  view.  In  his  surveys  of the  factories  and  workshops,  Babbage  set  out  to  reveal  the  systematic character of  the  machine  economy  by  pointing  out  the  rationale  of  the production,  distribution,  and  deployment of  power  in the  workshops  of industrial  Britain.  In  his  project  to build  intelligent  calculating  engines, he  attempted  to  represent  himself as the intellectual  manager  of the complex  labour  relations  of  the  machine  tool  industry, disastrously  initially, and  then  as  part  of his overall vision  of a  newly  rational  system  of automatic  precision  engineering. In the  setting  of  early  Victorian  society,  the connexions  between  these worlds cannot be seen as  merely metaphorical. These  techniques  helped make  a  new  social  order  and  a  new  form  of knowledge. The  systematic  gaze  was  designed to  produce the  rational order  it  purported to discover. This  is to  place  Babbage's project  alongside  those  of  Bentham,  whose  panoptic schemes  have  been  associated with the  production  of the docile  body,  and of Samuel  Smiles,  whose  ha-

- 39.  Lady Byron,  letter to William  King,  21  June  1833,  quoted  in Doris  Langley  Moore, Ada Countess  of  Lovelace:  Byron's  egitimate  aughter  (New  York, 1977),  pp.  43-44. L D Darwin's use of  Babbage's argument  is discussed  in Desmond  and  James  Moore,  Darwin  (New  York, 1991),  pp.  212-28.
- 40.  Babbage, Passages  in the  Life  of  a  Philosopher, .405  and  see Ninth  Bridgewater  reatise, p T pp.  108-19.

giographies  cleverly  connected  the  self-fashioning  of the  Victorian  engineers  with  the  transformations  they  wrought on  the  material  world.41 Under  Babbage's productive  gaze,  the  powers  of the  body  were rendered mechanical and  thus profitable, or  wasteful  and thus consigned to oblivion.

41.  See  Foucault,  'The  Eye  of Power'. For Smiles on  self-fashioning  and  system  building,  see Thomas  Parke  Hughes,  introduction,  in  Smiles,  Selections  rom  Lives  of  the  Engineers f (Cambridge,  Mass.  1966),  pp.  9-25.  For a brilliant  analysis  of the  politics  of the  productive body,  see  Catherine  Gallagher,  'The  Body  versus  the  Social  Body  in Thomas  Malthus and Henry  Mayhew',  in  The  Making of  the Modern  Body,  ed. Gallagher  and  Thomas Laqueur (Berkeley,  1987),  pp.  83-106.