## Hiring Help for the Home: Household Services in the Twentieth Century

Sabino Kornrich 1

## Abstract

The division between home and market has long been a key dimension of family life and shifts across the home/market boundary are important for both gender inequality and the family. Two shifts across this boundary occurred in the twentieth century: women's movement into paid labor and a decline in household labor. One stylized conception suggests that as women moved into paid labor, they used their new resources to purchase replacements. This article takes up this question, asking whether women's movement into market labor led to the commodification of the home. It does so by combining evidence from primary and secondary sources about women's reliance on services to offer a picture of how services have been used. The article argues that household labor is infused with emotional and relational content which has made it difficult to replace.

## Keywords

outsourcing, household labor, commodification, services, paid labor

In the United States, the division between home and market has long been a key dimension of family life and gender roles. In the context of an ideology of separate spheres, shifts across the home/market boundary are important for understanding both gender inequality and the family. Women's movement into paid labor was one important shift across this boundary, but another has been a decline in women's hours spent in household labor, presumably as households purchased labor in the market. 1 This article takes up, in part, the question of the extent to which these shifts across the home/market boundary are related-has the movement of women into market labor led to the commodification of the home through the purchase of replacement labor?

A stylized conception suggests that as women moved out of the home into paid labor, they used their new-found resources to purchase replacements for their labor in the home. 2 In this view, then, women's participation in paid labor is the key cause of the ''outsourcing'' which constitutes the commodification of the home. While this is intuitively appealing, a longer view suggests that women's labor force participation does not clearly cause the outsourcing of household labor. After all, hiring others to work in one's home is hardly new. Domestic servants were more common near the

## Corresponding Author:

Sabino Kornrich, Center for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences, Juan March Institute, Calle de Castell' o 77, 28006 Madrid, Spain Email: skornrich@march.es

Journal of Family History 37(2) 197-212 ª 2012 The Author(s) Reprints and permission: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/0363199011432539 http://jfh.sagepub.com

<!-- image -->

beginning of the twentieth century than near the end, and while new types of outsourcing have become more important, others have disappeared.

Additionally, while married women's labor force participation increased throughout the entire course of the twentieth century, changes in women's time in household labor and the progress of outsourcing was more uneven. The beginning of the twentieth century witnessed little changes in women's time spent in household labor and the abandonment of some forms of outsourcing. Even in the 1960s and 1970s, a paradox was that women's greater labor force participation and the increased availability of household technology produced little change in the amount and distribution of household labor-it remained a female-dominated arena, and contemporary estimates suggest no change in time spent. 3 Women who worked outside the home later worked at home in a ''second shift'' of household labor. 4 It is thus unclear that, at least in the beginning, women used earnings from their labor force participation to rid themselves of work in the home.

The replacement of household labor is often portrayed as a purely economic processes, albeit one which is highly gendered. 5 Yet, qualitative research on the performance of household labor typically highlights the emotional content of household labor. Women's labor in the home, rather than simply providing services which can be easily replaced on the open market, is infused with emotional and relational content which means that it is more difficult to replace with a purchased service. The author argues that for this reason, the movement of labor out of the home occurred only haphazardly throughout the course of the twentieth century. While external forces such as the establishment of child care during World War II led to temporary changes, the perceived importance of women performing these tasks in the home meant that permanent changes often took place much more slowly.

This article offers a comprehensive view of the ''outsourcing'' of services from the home throughout the twentieth century and the way it has fit into the family at different points in time. Existing research often generalizes from contemporary associations between women's income and outsourcing to draw longitudinal conclusions. By combining evidence from a variety of scholarly and public sources about the nature of women's reliance on different services, the author offers a picture of how services have been used through the twentieth century, as well as push-back against those services that occurred due to the privileged place given women's household labor. The author draws on Census data to illustrate occupational trends for workers in a variety of outsourcing jobs to supplement the qualitative evidence. The author does not go into great detail prior to 1900, as it is well covered elsewhere, including Salmon (1897, 1906), Rubinow (1906), Sutherland (1981), and Katzman (1978). 6

## Help for the Home to the Turn of the Twentieth Century

At most times, the rich have relied on the labor of others to help satisfy their needs and desires. From Sumeria in the fourth millennium BC to later civilizations in Rome, India, and the Middle East, both general and specialized labor was provided by slaves. 7 In the early colonial period in the United States, slaves, indentured servants, and a few waged workers provided wealthy families with extra labor. 8 In the nineteenth century, after the abolition of slavery, the market for domestic servants boomed. Before the adoption of household technology, housework required long hours and physical exertion. For example, cooking involved hauling water and wood over long distances to fuel a cooking fire, and feeding a family for a day meant preparing two or three meals and the hard work required for each. 9 Laundry was similarly laborious, as it also required fetching water, boiling it on a hearth or stove, and scrubbing, wringing, and ironing clothes. Indeed, laundry typically took an entire day and was undertaken only once a week, with part of the following day reserved for ironing. 10 With demand greater than the supply of workers, black women and recent European immigrants met households' desires for extra labor.

Servants-''domestic help''-were typical in middle- and upper-class households near the end of the nineteenth century. While these households struggled to find servants who lived up to their

Table 1. Size of Domestic Service Work Force, 1850-2000

|      | Number of Domestic Servants, in Thousands   |   Number of Households per Domestic Servant |   Number of Persons per Domestic Servant |
|------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| 1850 | 25.5                                        |                                       141.1 |                                    909.5 |
| 1860 | 616                                         |                                         8.5 |                                     51   |
| 1870 | 975                                         |                                         7.8 |                                     39.5 |
| 1880 | 1,347                                       |                                         7.4 |                                     37.3 |
| 1900 | 1,862                                       |                                         8.6 |                                     40.9 |
| 1910 | 2,109                                       |                                         9.6 |                                     43.7 |
| 1920 | 1,600                                       |                                        15.8 |                                     66.3 |
| 1930 | 1,949                                       |                                        15.3 |                                     63.2 |
| 1940 | 2,351                                       |                                        14.9 |                                     56.2 |
| 1950 | 1,521                                       |                                        28.6 |                                     99.5 |
| 1960 | 2,104                                       |                                        25.1 |                                     85.2 |
| 1970 | 1,579                                       |                                        40.2 |                                    128.8 |
| 1980 | 692                                         |                                       116.7 |                                    327.4 |
| 1990 | 558                                         |                                       167.3 |                                    445.7 |
| 2000 | 647                                         |                                       161.8 |                                    450.4 |

Notes: Domestic servants include laundresses in these figures. Data for 1890 are not available. Figures produced by author from the International Public Use Microdata Sample (Ruggles et al. 2008).

standards, nearly all employed some, even if on a temporary or rotating basis. 11 Occupational statistics show the prevalence of domestic servants: in the waning years of the nineteenth century, there was roughly one domestic servant for every eight households, as Table 1 shows. Of course, the extent to which households could find servants was contingent on local labor market conditions. In the South, where there was a large supply of black women who needed employment, about four fifths of even middle-class households (earning between $500 and $3,000 contemporary dollars per year) hired some form of help, even as late as the mid-1930s. 12 Yet, in other areas of the country, like Lansing or Portland, only one third of households hired help. 13

Servants were hired to do heavy and difficult work which upper-class and middle-class women hoped to avoid. There were some specialized workers, such as nannies or butlers, but they were employed only in the wealthiest households. More typical work included scrubbing, cleaning, laundry, and cooking, with servants typically working days ranging in length from ten to twelve hours. 14 When households could not afford a full-time domestic servant, they likely paid for part-time work. Most common was the labor of a laundress or launderer, who might come once a week. 15 Additionally, peddlers and delivery boys often brought goods to the home, saving women the labor of going to the market. 16

Hiring help did not mean the elimination of work for women. Salmon 17 describes women's tasks below

The duties of the housekeeper are multifarious. The ideal housekeeper must have a knowledge of culinary affairs. Not only must she know how to make food palatable, but she must understand its nutritive and its economic value. She must be able to superintend the cutting and making of ordinary garments. She must understand the oversight of her household employees; the details of marketing; the principles of laundry work; the keeping of household accounts; the care of the sick. She must know how to care for the house and all of its furniture, from attic to cellar . . . She should understand the principles of the kindergarten, and not shrink from applying the fundamental ideas of ethics and psychology to the training of children. She must at all times be ready to perform her social obligations in the circle in which she moves.

Salmon's list includes activities which produced and maintained the status of the household-proper moral upbringing for children, adherence to established standards of taste in decoration and eating, and the performance of social obligations. Upper-middle class women of the time were expected to direct servants in the administration of the household, using servants' labor for the heaviest tasks so they could free themselves for other status-producing activities like taking care of children and engaging in social responsibilities. 18 While women relied on help from domestic servants, many also worked long hours themselves-often ten to twelve hours a day. 19

The beginning of the twentieth century marked a turning point in the history of outsourcing as middle- and upper-class households began to switch from hiring help to purchasing finished goods and technical innovations that eased household labor. Households turned to ready to use productsclothing, prepared foods, mined coal, electricity, and other goods-to replace work once done in the home. They did so for a variety of reasons, but chief among them was that systems of producing and distributing goods had advanced to the point that it made economic sense for households to adopt them. As household appliances, gas, and electricity became affordable, families saw these as replacements for the help they used to hire. 20

Yet, the adoption of finished goods did not end the use of services in the home or women's efforts there as well. Finished goods and household innovations eased the physical labor involved in household tasks, but the number of tasks and their emotional content increased through the twentieth century. Housework was transformed from a task necessary for the maintenance of physical health and wellbeing to one which allowed the demonstration of love and caring. The increasing emotional content necessitated continued work for women in the home and the use of services to supplement their labor.

Still, households adopted technical innovations as they became available. Vacuums, washers, refrigerators, and other devices running on electricity all increased the efficiency of household work. 21 While these devices were adopted by members of the upper-class early in the twentieth century, widespread adoption would not occur until after World War II. Other finished products included a range of food stuffs which eased work spent canning and baking, and clothes which reduced time spent sewing and mending. The process of replacing home labor with goods made outside the home was far from uniform. Salmon, writing in 1897, notes that canning, baking, making butter, evaporated milk, soups, and jellies were still in a phase of transition out of the home. She goes on to list items never produced outside the home at that time, including ready-to-eat meals, vegetable preparation, and ''scientifically'' baked bread. 22 Finally, the mass introduction of running water, central heat, and electricity were equally important, because they eliminated the hauling of water and wood for every meal and cleaning task. 23

For the earliest adopters, devices were not replacements for hired help. Instead, servants were expected to use these tools to do their work more efficiently. Early advertisements reflect this expectation, as they showed servants using vacuum cleaners, washing machines, or gas stoves. 24 Yet, perhaps because new technologies made cleanliness possible even without servants, the importance of women's own work for cleanliness and hygiene in the home was a new theme in the 1920s. Magazine editorials, recipes, and advertisements began to announce the value of housework for the creation of emotional and physical health, and later advertisements showed upper-class women using the devices instead of servants (Cowan 1983; Strasser 1982). 25 New marketing suggested that women could truly show their love for their family by creating a clean and welcoming environment and preparing wholesome food. Many upper-class women took on some of these tasks, though a true proletarianization of housework was yet to come. While women in the lower classes had a harder time meeting expectations, there was substantial pressure on them. Social workers encouraged these women to spend responsibly while performing the substantial amounts of labor necessary to maintain appropriate conditions in the home. 26

A parallel development was the increasing emotional value placed on children. Zelizer documents the shift in children's value from the monetary value of their labor to the ''priceless'' value

of a treasured child. 27 New work regulations prevented children from working. Reduced play space and increased dangers from city living led children to spend more time in the home. 28 Mothers spent more time caring for children and engaging in activities with them, a trend that persisted through the rest of the twentieth century. 29

These transitions meant that wealthy homemakers ended up doing a greater share of their own work. Yet, this transition was not inevitable: there were a wide variety of experiments with alternatives to home-based work. Entrepreneurs and communitarians tried to promote laundry services, cooked meal services, apartment houses (with full service), and communal living with shared chores. 30 But while some services were widely adopted-for example, roughly 70 percent of families sent laundry out in the year 1918-1919-most were not, and some that had been in wide use waned in popularity quickly. 31 Families instead purchased appliances, perhaps because services were unpredictable. In addition to unpredictability, Cowan argues that families rejected these services because they wanted to preserve activities central to family life. 32 Similarly, Reid suggested that household members continued to do their own work because they were familiar with the tastes and desires within their household. 33

Traditional forms of outsourcing like hiring servants to help in one's home declined in importance as the country approached the Great Depression. The earlier labor force statistics in Table 1 show this trend, as the year 1910 marks the last great concentration of domestic workers. From 1910 to 1920, the number of domestic servants declined for the first time in absolute numbers, and the number of households per domestic servant grew by more than 50 percent to 15 households per servant. This figure stayed steady until World War II, when the Depression pushed workers into domestic service as an occupation of last resort.

## The Depression and the War

The Depression and World War II saw the widespread disruption of family life. Unemployment for men and men's absence due to the war often led to women's labor force participation and, in some cases, a lessening of men's authority in the home and conflict over ''proper'' roles. 34 Following the war, families searched for normalcy by reestablishing the primacy of the family (or, perhaps, establishing this primacy for the first time). While many still use some form of outside help, the emotional importance attached to women's work-originating in the 1920s but increasing over time-meant that many women could or would not consider substantial replacement of their own labor. 35 After World War II, a devotion to the construction of a family haven meant increasing emotional investment in women's work in the home. The parallel increase in standards of living led to widespread investment in domestic technology with which women did housework.

At the beginning of this period, however, the depression years were a shock as job loss led to a generalized austerity which continued women's turn to doing their own work, even among the upper class. Emily Post's etiquette manual serves as an example of the changing responsibilities for women in the home among the upper class. The 1937 edition of her etiquette manual for the first time advised of the difficulties for women who not only hosted dinner parties but also cooked and served the meals that would be consumed at these parties. 36 Previously, upper-class women would certainly have had help from servants in preparing and serving meals and would not have cooked and served in addition to hosting. Despite this, labor force statistics show that the use of domestic help experienced a slight resurgence. Increasing numbers of workers in domestic service during the 1930s likely resulted from women searching for work in domestic service as an occupation of last resort. Thus, despite the availability of technology, finished products, and the increased emotional content of work, the increased need for paid work meant stability in the number of servants throughout the 1930s.

Some new forms of outsourcing started to become important as well, such as restaurant eating. Families were now spending more leisure time touring in their automobiles, meaning roadside

restaurants became a site for food and, often, destinations in their own right, flourishing along main roads to other towns. 37 Additionally, the end of Prohibition meant resurgence in taverns serving both food and beer. For example, Springfield, Illinois had 169 taverns serving food and beer in 1935, a high point for this form of establishment. 38 Taverns and other downtown restaurants were located near primary places of employment and provided workers with light meals while at work as well as a center for social life after work. Eating out was thus initially linked to life outside the home: leisure and work.

A different innovation occurred in child care: the Depression years saw the establishment of day care at a federal level for the first time. Partially as a means to create work, and partially to serve children from needy families, the Works Progress Administration provided money to establish nursery schools. 39 While the number of children cared for in these centers was small, totaling only roughly 40,000, this was an innovation in organized child care outside the home. This specific organization of child care did not last past the Depression, but it served as an example for day care centers during the war.

Indeed, the war years provided yet another shock. With men out of the country, women workers were needed in a variety of war industries, and many women went to work. While some propaganda pushed women to work in factories, most media and government figures stressed the importance of women's roles as mothers rather than workers and urged them to make time for their duties in the home. In an article published in the Woman's Home Companion in 1944, J. Edgar Hoover, head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) at the time, implored mothers to stay in their homes in order to ensure that children were properly raised, noting that, ''the happy home . . . is the home where the child rushes in . . . and gets a welcoming answer.'' 40 In the same issue, responding to concerns over growing juvenile delinquency, James Madison Wood, president of Stephens College (a two-year college for women), noted that ''the job of every American mother . . . is to care for her children,'' and proposed ''drafting'' mothers to stay in the home, even paying those who faced financial hardship. 41 The work of child care and home care was invested with emotional importance, and, for many, women's place was fulfilling this emotional role.

Child care became enough of a problem to attract federal attention because many mothers did go to work. In order to support war industries and the children of mothers working in those industries, the federal government provided funding for child care centers through the Lanham Act. Yet because organization of the child care centers fell on local authorities, there was tremendous variability in its provision. In Detroit and Seattle, authorities organized early to submit applications for federal funds to start day care centers, and these cities saw widespread use of centers after various challenges related to location and cost were worked out. 42 In Baltimore, officials were slow to organize and child care never became a reality despite the availability of federal funds. After the war, centers quickly lost support and were closed, as Lanham Act sponsors did not want to support women's work outside the home or support child care other than the mother's. 43

The war years and the Depression thus saw two very different shocks to family life, caused by economic disruption and the war. These shocks as well as rapid change in legal structures and the availability of the automobile led to some dramatic changes in the types of outsourcing available (the development of organized child care and eating out). Yet, while these innovations were substantial, the postwar period would see retrenchment against them.

## The Postwar Years

Coming out of the war years and the Depression, the postwar years saw a resurgence of familism. 44 Three factors combined to produce this outcome. First, for many, the depression and war years were something they wanted to leave behind, and they hoped to create new and different lives. Second, the suburbanization of the United States created isolated homes which became

the center of and focus for an isolated family life. Finally, the cohort entering adulthood during the 1950s was likely more oriented toward family life because of their unique Depression-era experiences.

Women played a large part in creating the ''new'' home, providing emotional support and doing the extra housework to create a sense of family life. Expectations of support ranged from the extreme to the routine. For those with husbands returning from the war, the Ladies Home Journal advised that they should expect that their husbands had been unfaithful while away, but that their duty was nonetheless to welcome him back to their homes. 45 Wives were also expected to help their husbands get ahead at work by creating a relaxing home: not complaining about ''Sunday papers, cigar stubs, empty glasses, and assorted items,'' keeping order and cleanliness in the home and particularly by not demanding too much of their husbands' attention and leaving them free to succeed. 46 These tasks demonstrated devotion to their husbands, assisted their husband's future success, and illustrated the emotional content of everyday work.

The work itself continued to be lightened by domestic technology, but the expectation that women would remain in the home meant the intensification of labor and the ratcheting up of standards. 47 Meals became more complex and standards of cleanliness increased, as some household tasks were done for the first (and potentially last) time. Recollections of the era suggest that housewives in this period ironed sheets, washed walls, and had sparkling clean floors. 48

Higher standards combined with the baby boom to mean that many women spent a great deal of time on child care and child rearing. A contemporary observer noted, ''middle-class child-raising is marked by strong anxiety feelings centered on the child. This anxiety can only be held in check if the baby is raised by the most perfected technic (sic) available.'' 49 Perhaps as a reaction to the upheavals in child care during the war years-and fears of juvenile delinquency that accompanied them-postwar advice about children, like that of Dr. Spock, suggested that the only path to mental and physical health for children was through establishing a strong bond with their mothers. 50

With such importance placed on the work of women in the household, it became more difficult for women to purchase complete substitutes for their work. On this subject, Caplow notes:

the emotional aura surrounding housework is so intensified by this manner of regarding it that any rationalization of functions . . . is severely hampered. The most curious consequence is that the housewife who wishes to effect a substitution . . . is likely to sustain both guilt feelings and criticism from others, in terms of the belief that no real substitution is possible . . . 51

Thus, there was cultural pressure on women who might have been interested in performing a substitution. However, Caplow continues on to note that, ''the housewife who employs a servant in order to assure her own leisure is not penalized in this way. Her continued presence in the household guarantees the emotional values.'' Thus, upper-class women who could afford to both be in the home and pay for servants were morally able to do so, but other women would suffer a stigma if they could not maintain moral values through their presence in the home.

Nonetheless, growing affluence for those in the middle and upper classes meant that more families could afford to purchase help, even though this help did not necessarily mean that women were freed from their responsibilities. Occupational statistics show a complex pattern of changes in the postwar era, as a number of ''helping'' occupations grew dramatically. Table 2 shows these changes and highlights several features of the period. First, the number of domestic servants (as well as the number per household or even per person) did grow slightly during the 1950s, though there were still many fewer servants than in the prewar period. Most striking, however, was the growth in the restaurant industry, as the numbers of waiters and waitresses more than doubled and the number of other workers nearly doubled over the course of ten years. Drive-in restaurants and a variety of other fast food restaurants became more popular as families spent more money on and time in cars.

Table 2. Number of Workers in ''Domestic Outsourcing'' Occupations, in Thousands, 1850-2000

|   Year | Domestic Servants   | Laundresses   | Waiters and Waitresses   | Workers in Eating and Drinking Places   | Babysitters/ Home-Based Child care Workers   | Nonhome-Based Child Care Workers   |
|--------|---------------------|---------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|   1850 | 25                  | 0.5           | 7                        | 22                                      |                                              |                                    |
|   1860 | 575                 | 41            | 9                        | 29                                      |                                              |                                    |
|   1870 | 907                 | 68            | 25                       | 64                                      |                                              |                                    |
|   1880 | 1,213               | 134           | 35                       | 125                                     |                                              |                                    |
|   1900 | 1,473               | 389           | 107                      | 230                                     |                                              |                                    |
|   1910 | 1,579               | 530           | 212                      | 423                                     |                                              |                                    |
|   1920 | 1,210               | 390           | 214                      | 417                                     |                                              |                                    |
|   1930 | 1,608               | 341           | 355                      | 738                                     |                                              |                                    |
|   1940 | 2,148               | 203           | 618                      | 1,300                                   |                                              |                                    |
|   1950 | 1,447               | 74            | 740                      | 1,898                                   |                                              |                                    |
|   1960 | 2,042               | 62            | 1,813                    | 3,225                                   | 546                                          |                                    |
|   1970 | 1,555               | 24            | 2,119                    | 4,148                                   | 498                                          | 234                                |
|   1980 | 688                 | 4             | 2,291                    | 6,514                                   | 257                                          | 971                                |
|   1990 | 556                 | 2             | 2,023                    | 8,080                                   | 229                                          | 1,288                              |
|   2000 | 647                 |               | 2,306                    | 9,216                                   | 196                                          | 1,809                              |

Notes: Empty cells indicate that occupations were not enumerated in the years in question. Figures produced by author from the International Public Use Microdata Sample (Ruggles et al. 2008).

Marking the increased attention paid to children, the number of babysitters was first enumerated separately in 1960, foreshadowing the tremendous growth in child care still to come.

In all, the shocks of the Depression and World War II had the effect of reinforcing women's place in the home, as the caretaker of a haven for children and husbands alike. Because of the importance invested in their work, they were morally proscribed from seeking too much help. Still, many of the old systems of hiring domestic help persisted, in part because there was little alternative work for black women and because wealthy white women who were able to stay home faced weaker moral proscriptions. In coming years, as alternative occupations opened up for black women and more white women attended college and planned on careers beyond homemaking, the pool of domestic workers shrunk further and the array of outsourcing changed yet again.

## Turbulent Times: Civil Rights and the 1970s.

Three headlines from the New York Times in the late 1970s suggest family changes: ''The Case of the Vanishing Mommy,'' ''A Wrinkle in Housework: Wives on Job, Help Scarce,'' and ''Day Care Comes of Age.'' 52 While these exaggerate the extent of change, they do indicate general trends. More mothers worked outside the home and domestic servants and nannies were becoming much less common. Day care was still relatively rare at the end of the 1970s-indeed, the article on day care discusses several recently founded day care centers and notes their general scarcity-but it was becoming more common.

Married women's labor force participation increased throughout the twentieth century but the 1960s and 1970s were marked by a particularly rapid increase, from roughly 32 percent in 1960 to over 53 percent in 1980. Women's labor force participation increased mainly because of new jobs available to women in the service sector. Whether women worked outside the home or not, however, one of the paradoxes of these decades was that changes in household technology and women's position outside the home produced little change in patterns of work inside the home. 53 Women did as much housework as they had throughout the twentieth century. 54 For those who worked for pay,

these hours came in a ''second shift'' completed at home after working a first paid shift at their place of employment. 55 Why, despite the diffusion of household technologies, did time in housework remain stable? Cowan argues that high standards for housework, new tasks for women, and a decline in outsourcing led to stability. 56 Standards for middle-class homes had been set relatively high in the 1950s, and those joining the middle class acquired tools for running a middle-class home as well as higher standards and larger homes.

Another reason household labor changed little was that it was centrally implicated in gendered understandings of the family at a time when changes in women's labor force participation occurred more quickly than changes in gender norms. Two landmark ethnographic studies of families from these decades, Hochschild's Second Shift and Rubin's Worlds of Pain , document the difficulties of adjusting to changing work arrangements and gender norms. While women were trying to live new lives, men's participation in the household remained limited and stable. 57

Women also had less help from outside. Private household laundresses and commercial laundries had practically disappeared by the beginning of the 1970s (see Table 2). While this was partially because doing laundry took less overall time because of the introduction of washing machines, it may also be that middle- and upper-class women now did more of the labor. Rather than having food and other goods delivered, women drove to stores to buy needed household goods, and suburbanization meant that these tasks took longer. 58 Women spent time transporting children to various classes, tasks, and events. Indeed, the two categories of women's time use which grew most in this period were shopping and transportation. 59

Finally, domestic servants practically disappeared, increasing the workload for families who would have relied on servants. One reason for the rapid decline was the expansion of other job opportunities. Domestic service was typically a job of last resort, taken because of economic need and because other jobs were unavailable. 60 In 1960, roughly half of the 2.6 million total domestic workers (including babysitters) were black women, and for white women, domestic service was only a temporary position. Nearly a quarter of white domestic servants were between the ages of fourteen and twenty with another significant concentration among those over the age of fifty-five. Among black women, however, few were under the age of twenty, with most in prime working years between the age of twenty-five and fifty-five.

After the passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964, however, some opportunities opened for black women in other fields as discriminatory barriers were lowered. A major supply of domestic servants thus disappeared as younger African American women no longer sought employment in this field. 61 Instead, employers began to rely more heavily on immigrants from third-world countries, but the flow of these workers before 1980 was still small, so employers faced a limited supply. 62 While households hired fewer servants, there was no decline in the desire for help. Employment agencies of the time complained of their inability to meet demand, and noted that anyone who wanted to would be able to find work as a domestic. 63

Faced with a limited supply of domestic workers, families turned to other options. The most important innovation in outsourcing in this period was the development of day care for preschool age children. The establishment of Head Start in 1965 provided an example that other programs emulated. Head Start began as an eight-week program staffed by volunteers to provide services for low-income families and enrolled over half a million children in its first summer. 64 Because of the extent of demand, many Head Start locations evolved into nine-month programs offering child care, increasing the scope of provision and the numbers of children cared for. Families above the poverty line were typically not eligible for Head Start programs.

It is unclear whether Head Start specifically was used as an example by middle-class parents but organized child care became widely used across all classes in the subsequent years. The earliest private programs were often community-based and community-subsidized, allowing them to offer reduced-cost services to those who could not afford more expensive forms of child care like nannies,

which were still relatively common. 65 Parents used these centers as a way to provide care for children while they were at work. Yet, the opportunities provided by these centers for their children to receive supplemental education and socialization with other children in the same age group were also important to parents.

Eating out increased in importance with changes in the restaurant industry. The number of chain stores doubled from 1972 to 1981 and then doubled again between 1981 and 1990. 66 Some of this expansion is attributable to greater demand for quickly prepared food resulting from increases in the number of single-person households. Yet, the success of chains had much to do with innovations in governance and centralized production. Successful chains developed effective governance mechanisms which produced a predictable and efficient environment for the customer while controlling costs. 67 Eating out at chain restaurants offered families a quick and reliable way to obtain food.

## The 1980s through the 2000s

The last two decades of the twentieth century began with a great deal of concern over the family. Divorce rates had been increasing dramatically since the 1960s, peaking in 1979. Writing about changes in the families in the 1970s and 1980s, several sociologists suggested that options for the future included either ''new families''-characterized by changes by men in response to changing patterns of women's labor force participation-or ''no families.'' 68

In many ways, it appears that ''new families'' won out. Women's labor force participation became the norm, even for mothers with young children (Casper and Bianchi 2002). Women's household labor began to decrease, and men's time began to increase. 69 While fully egalitarian marriages were rare, their very presence was a new development. For the families of these decades, it seemed that a new model of marriage applied. Rather than coming together so one partner could specialize in paid work and the other in unpaid work, new marriages were based both partners participating in a range of activities together. 70

The adoption of the ''new'' family model has led many researchers to ask about the consequences of women's movement into paid work. Indeed, researchers have asked how families replace ''female'' labor in child care, cooking, or housecleaning when participate in paid labor. 71 Broadly, this view suggests that purchased services replace women's work in the home, completing a process of industrialization of the home. Thus, this view sees women's movement into paid labor as the catalyst for removing the final remnants of work from the home.

While there is some evidence to suggest increased service use, families used services not just because women were working outside the home. Additionally, while some services gained in popularity, others become less common. For the case of child care, certainly, when both parents worked, families needed to make some sort of arrangement. Yet, paid child care was not the only option: many families juggled schedules or worked different shifts so that children were always in family care. 72

Formalized child care did become more popular throughout the 1980s and 1990s, but perhaps because it offered parents a supplement to their labor rather than a replacement. Certainly, one reason organized child care centers became more widely used was that they were more predictable and accountable than babysitters of family-based day cares. Editorials lamented the distress caused when a babysitter was sick or suddenly stopped working for a particular family. Family-based day cares were also suspect because the quality of care they offered was unreliable. In one 1990 case which received substantial media attention, fifty-four children, including thirteen infants, were found in the care of a thirteen-year-old at an unlicensed day care in Maryland. 73 While the adult caretaker responsible claimed this was an unusual situation, parents must have wondered whether their own day care was similar.

In addition to predictable and accountable child care, bureaucratized and formally organized day cares offered socialization and education for children. Parents-especially middle-class and

upper-class parents-sought a variety of educational, social, and athletic activities for their children to impart them with skills and experiences perceived as necessary for a middle-class experience. 74 Montessori schools, learning centers, and preschools offered a supplement to parental labor, ensuring that children received ''proper'' early education and socialization. Of course, there were and are substantial class differences in the use of care. Children of poorer parents are more likely to participate in unorganized play and less likely to be in organized care. Among the wealthy, some families still rely on nannies or live-in housekeepers who provide child care. 75 This has often been an uncertain option for these parents, however, because of their concerns about appropriate socialization. Finding nannies with the requisite social skills and language abilities is often difficult, particularly for families with older children. 76

On the whole, domestic servants were rare in the several decades before the close of the twentieth century, as the absolute number of domestic servants declined sharply until the 1990s. An influx of immigrants in the 1990s, particularly undocumented immigrants, has meant a growth in the supply of workers willing to perform domestic labor for low wages, countering the earlier downward trend. 77 Additionally, while there are fewer workers, housecleaners now work for bureaucratized ''maid services'' which cover more houses. 78 Still, only a small portion of American households hire domestic servants.

Eating out continued to increase in importance, although less rapidly than earlier. Indeed, though families ate out more than before, meals eaten in the home retain a powerful pull for families as they offer a time for families to bond and are a central ritual of family life. 79 When asked if they would prefer to eat out more frequently if money were not a concern, many respondents say they would not, as they see the family meal as an important ritual to be preserved. 80 Families still value the emotional content of shared meals, although they also face pressures to find time to prepare and jointly consume meals.

Similarly, while families have increased their reliance on organized child care, they have also increased the time spent in direct interaction with their children as well as the emotional investment in this. The concept of the family maintains a strong hold. Women who choose employment rather than full-time care of the home often express ambivalence about the choice, as family maintains a powerful hold on women. 81 Fathers also expressed more of a commitment to family life during this period, with at least some committed to sharing family work along with a greater commitment to a father role.

The fit of services into family life at the close of the twentieth century was thus ambivalent. Families relied on eating out and formalized child care outside of the home more than ever before, and day care had become important. Yet, the amount of help inside the home was perhaps at its lowest point in the twentieth century, and many families strongly felt that replacing the remaining work with services would be undesirable. The special meaning of time spent with children and the preparation of meals meant that families often devoted extra effort to these despite widespread alternatives to doing the labor themselves.

## Conclusion

In contrast to recent scholarship which nearly always suggests that households turned to services in response to women's labor force participation-whether because women had less time or because they had more money to hire replacements for their labor-this article argues that over the course of the twentieth century families obtained help both before women moved into paid labor and afterward. Certainly, some services appeared since married women's rapid movement into paid labor in the 1960s and 1970s, like day care and bureaucratized ''maid services.'' Yet, the number of domestic servants has declined steadily since the 1870s, and laundresses and commercial laundry services had their heydays in the 1910s and 1920s. Even the appearance of commercialized and bureaucratized

maid services represents the culmination of a long movement away from a single domestic servant living with a family. As early as the 1920s, servants worked for multiple families and lived in their own homes, and the establishment of arms-length relationships between housekeepers and their customers replaced the older system of intimate and hierarchical relations inherent in the mistress/maid relation.

Of course, other innovations have helped replace the declining numbers of in-home workers. Child care workers, who were not separately counted prior to 1960, constituted a work force three times as large as domestic servants by the end of the century. Eating out has also been a new development, as the car meant that families spent more time outside the home in the pursuit of leisure. These services and the distribution of an ever-increasing range of finished goods are new realities, though it is not clear that they result solely because women have moved into paid labor. Instead, a variety of technological innovations and social changes have contributed to increased reliance on these new services and goods.

Given the wide range of opportunities for outsourcing, perhaps the best question is not why some families outsource, but why many families still do not. The history of housework and outsourcing in the twentieth century suggests that families do not outsource all of their labor because the meanings invested in the labor are still too great-the production of gender and family are both tied into the performance of household labor. 82 At the same time that work became lighter and more easily done, it was invested with more emotional content and importance. Norms of child-raising now require that parents spend more time and make greater emotional and material investments than in the past, and women's work in the home did and does symbolize their affection for and devotion to their family. Even today, family meals retain an important symbolic value.

Research on consumption has emphasized the role of the symbolic and cultural in determining consumption decisions. Services, perhaps even more than objects, are fundamentally linked to decisions about how individuals choose to live. Child care, food, and labor maintaining the inside or outside of the household (housekeeping and gardening) are fundamentally linked to individuals' judgments about how to organize their lives. Research on domestic servants has often incidentally documented the desires and behaviors of the households who hired servants in addition to the challenges facing women working as domestic servants, suggesting that while female employers certainly wanted someone to do their work, this was true whether they felt the burden of a second shift or not. 83 What was more important was how they perceived the value of their time, rather than a practical limitation on the amount of time due to paid labor. Understanding when and whether families spend thus requires an understanding of how spending symbolically fits with other expectations.

## Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank Katherine Stovel, Julie Brines, Edgar Kiser, Gary Hamilton, Shannon Harper, Katrina Leupp, Willie Gin, and Rebecca Sheehan for their helpful comments on various versions of this article. The author would also like to acknowledge the United States Studies Centre for its support during this research.

## Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## Funding

The author received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## Notes

- 1. Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer, and John P. Robinson. ''Is Anyone Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor,'' Social Forces 79, no. 1 (2000): 191-228.

- 2. Bianchi et al. ''Is Anyone Doing the Housework?''; Michael Bittman, et al. ''When Does Gender Trump Money? Bargaining and Time in Household Work,'' American Journal of Sociology 109, no. 1 (2003): 186-214; Sanjiv Gupta, ''Her Money, Her Time: Women's Earnings and Their Housework Hours,'' Social Science Research 35, (2006): 975-999; Sanjiv Gupta, ''Autonomy, Dependence, or Display? The Relationship Between Married Women's Earnings and Housework,'' Journal of Marriage and Family 69, (2007): 399-417.
- 3. Sarah F. Berk, The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work in American Households. (New York: Plenum Press, 1985); Ruth Cowan, ''The 'Industrial Revolution' in the Home: Household Technology and Social Change in the 20th Century.'' Technology and Culture 17, no. 1 (1976): 1-23; Joann Vanek, ''Time Spent in Housework,'' Scientific American 231, no. 5 (1974): 116-20.
- 4. Hochschild, Arlie and Anne Machung, The Second Shift . (New York: Penguin Books, 1989).
- 5. Esther De Ruijter, Judith K. Treas, and Philip N. Cohen, ''Outsourcing the Gender Factory: Living Arrangements and Service Expenditures on Female and Male Tasks,'' Social Forces 84, no. 1 (2005): 305-322; Shelly Lundberg, and Robert A. Pollak, ''Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market.'' Journal of Political Economy 101, (1993): 988-1010.
- 6. David M. Katzman, Seven Days a Week: Women and Domestic Service in Industrializing America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978); Lucy Maynard Salmon, 1897. Domestic Service (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1897); Lucy Maynard Salmon, Progress in the Household (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1906); Daniel E. Sutherland, Americans and Their Servants: Domestic Service in the United States (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1981).
- 7. Judith Rollins, Between Women: Domestics and Their Employers (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1985).
- 8. Salmon, Domestic Service .
- 9. Susan Strasser, Never Done: A History of American Housework (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982).
- 10. Ruth Cowan, More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave (New York: Basic Books, 1983).
- 11. Salmon, Domestic Service ; Sutherland. Americans and Their Servants .
- 12. Phyllis Palmer, Domesticity and Dirt: Housewives and Domestic Servants in the United States 1920-1945 (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1989).
- 13. Ibid.
- 14. Katzman, Seven Days a Week.
- 15. Cowan, More Work for Mother.
- 16. Gary Cross, An All-Consuming Century: Why Commercialism Won in Modern America (New York: Columbia University Press, 2000).
- 17. Salmon, Progress in the Household , 67-68.
- 18. Palmer, Domesticity and Dirt.
- 19. Cowan, More Work for Mother.
- 20. Katzman, Seven Days a Week.
- 21. Cowan, More Work for Mother ; Jeremy Greenwood, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu, ''Engines of Liberation,'' Review of Economic Studies 72 (2005).
- 22. Salmon, Domestic Service .
- 23. Strasser, Never Done ; Stanley Lebergott, Pursuing Happiness: American Consumers in the Twentieth Century (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993).
- 24. Cowan, More Work for Mother ; Katzman, Seven Days a Week: Women and Domestic Service in Industrializing America .
- 25. Cowan, More Work for Mother ; Strasser, Never Done.
- 26. Viviana A. Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money: Pin Money, Paychecks, Poor Relief, and Other Currencies (New York: Basic Books, 1994).

- 27. Viviana A. Zelizer, Pricing the Priceless Child: The Changing Social Value of Children (New York: Basic Books, 1985).
- 28. Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd, Middletown: A Study in American Culture (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1930), Zelizer, Pricing the Priceless Child: The Changing Social Value of Children .
- 29. Liana Sayer, Suzanne M. Bianchi, and John P. Robinson, ''Are Parents Investing Less in Children? Trends in Mothers' and Fathers' Time with Children,'' American Journal of Sociology 110, no. 1 (2004).
- 30. Cowan, More Work for Mother .
- 31. Margaret G. Reid, Economics of Household Production (New York: John Wiley, 1934).
- 32. Cowan, More Work for Mother , 149-50.
- 33. Reid, Economics of Household Production .
- 34. Alice Kessler-Harris, Out to Work: A History of Wage-Earning Women in the United States (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003); Winifred Wandersee, Women's Work and Family Values, 1920-1940 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981).
- 35. Theodore Caplow, Sociology of Work (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1954).
- 36. Cowan, More Work for Mother .
- 37. John A. Jakle and Keith A. Sculle, Fast Food: Roadside Restaurants in the Automobile Age (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999); Lynd and Lynd, Middletown: A Study in American Culture .
- 38. Jakle and Sculle, Fast Food: Roadside Restaurants in the Automobile Age .
- 39. Virgnia Kerr, ''One Step Forward-Two Steps Back: Child Care's Long American History,'' in Child Care: Who Cares , ed. Pamela Roby (New York: Basic Books, 1973).
- 40. J. Edgar Hoover, ''Mothers ... Our Only Hope,'' Woman's Home Companion 1944; Nancy A. Walker, Women's Magazines 1940-1960: Gender Roles and the Popular Press (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 1998).
- 41. Walker, Women's Magazines 1940-1960: Gender Roles and the Popular Press ; James Madison Wood, ''Should We Draft Mothers?'' Woman's Home Companion (1944).
- 42. Karen Anderson, Wartime Women: Sex Roles, Family Relations, and the Status of Women During World War 2 (Westwood, CT: Greenwood Press, 1981).
- 43. Ibid; Betty G. Farrell, Family: The Making of an Idea, an Institution, and a Controversy in American Culture (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1999).
- 44. Anderson, Wartime Women ; Farrell, Family: The Making of an Idea, an Institution, and a Controversy in American Culture .
- 45. Walker, Women's Magazines 1940-1960: Gender Roles and the Popular Press .
- 46. Mrs. Dale Carnegie, ''How to Help Your Husband Get Ahead,'' Coronet (1954).
- 47. Cowan, More Work for Mother ; Vanek, ''Time Spent in Housework.''
- 48. Hochschild and Machung, The Second Shift .
- 49. Caplow, Sociology of Work , 259.
- 50. Anderson, Wartime Women , Kerr, ''One Step Forward-Two Steps Back: Child Care's Long American History.''
- 51. Caplow, Sociology of Work , 268.
- 52. Christian C. Beels, ''The Case of the Vanishing Mommy,'' New York Times (1978); James Dobson, ''DayCare Comes of Age,'' New York Times (1977); Diana Shaman, ''A Wrinkle in Housework: Wives on Job, Help Scarce,'' New York Times (1977).
- 53. Berk, The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work in American Households ; Cowan, More Work for Mother .
- 54. Vanek, ''Time Spent in Housework.''
- 55. Hochschild and Machung, The Second Shift .
- 56. Cowan, More Work for Mother .
- 57. Hochschild and Machung, The Second Shift ; Lillian Breslow Rubin, Worlds of Pain: Life in the WorkingClass Family (New York: Basic Books, 1976).

- 58. Cowan, More Work for Mother .
- 59. Vanek, ''Time Spent in Housework.''
- 60. Yale Brozen, ''Minimum Wage Rates and Household Workers,'' Journal of Law and Economics 5 (1962); Evelyn Nakano Glenn, Issei, Nisei, War Bride: Three Generations of Japanese American Women in Domestic Service (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986); Katzman, Seven Days a Week: Women and Domestic Service in Industrializing America .
- 61. Rollins, Between Women .
- 62. Palmer, Domesticity and Dirt ; Rollins, Between Women .
- 63. Shaman, ''A Wrinkle in Housework: Wives on Job, Help Scarce.''
- 64. Virginia Alexandra, Head Start: The Nation's Pride ... Celebrating 40 Years of Success (National Head Start Association, 2005).
- 65. Dobson, ''Day-Care Comes of Age.''
- 66. Jakle and Sculle, Fast Food: Roadside Restaurants in the Automobile Age .
- 67. Ibid.; George Ritzer, The Mcdonaldization of Society (Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press, 1993).
- 68. Frances K. Goldscheider and Linda J. Waite, New Families, No Families: The Transformation of the American Home (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991).
- 69. Suzanne M. Bianchi et al., ''Is Anyone Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor,'' Social Forces 79, no. 1 (2000).
- 70. David Lam, ''Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public Goods,'' Journal of Human Resources 22, no. 4 (1988).
- 71. Philip N. Cohen, ''Replacing Housework in the Service Economy: Gender, Class, and Race-Ethnicity in Service Spending,'' Gender and Society 12, no. 2 (1998); De Ruijter, Treas, and Cohen, ''Outsourcing the Gender Factory: Living Arrangements and Service Expenditures on Female and Male Tasks''; Cheryl D. Hayes, John L. Palmer, and Martha J. Lazlow, Who Cares for America's Children: Child Care Policy for the 1990s (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1990); Eva Jacobs, Stephanie Shipp, and Gregory Brown, ''Families of Working Wives Spending More on Services and Nondurables,'' Monthly Labor Review 112, no. 2 (1989); Lam, ''Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public Goods.''
- 72. Lynne M. Casper and Suzanne M. Bianchi, Continuity and Change in the American Family (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002); Martin O'Connell, Where's Papa? Fathers' Role in Child Care (Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 1993); Harriet Presser, Working in a 24/7 Economy: Challenges for American Families (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2003).
- 73. Debbie M. Price and Paul Duggan, ''54 Children Found in Day-Care Home; Unlicensed Md. Operation Ordered Closed,'' Washington Post , May 26, 1990.
- 74. Annette Lareau, Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003).
- 75. Pierrette Hondagneu-Sotelo, Domestica: Immigrant Workers Cleaning and Caring in the Shadows of Affluence (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
- 76. Julia Wrigley, Other People's Children (New York: Basic Books, 1995).
- 77. Hondagneu-Sotelo, Domestica: Immigrant Workers Cleaning and Caring in the Shadows of Affluence ; Ruth Milkman, Ellen Reese, and Benita Roth, ''The Macrosociology of Paid Domestic Labor,'' Work and Occupations 25, no. 4 (1998).
- 78. Hondagneu-Sotelo, Domestica: Immigrant Workers Cleaning and Caring in the Shadows of Affluence ; Jennifer Bickham Mendez, ''Of Mops and Maids: Contradictions and Continuities in Bureacratized Domestic Works,'' Social Problems 45, no. 1 (1998).
- 79. Nickie Charles and Marion Kerr, Women, Food, and Families (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988).
- 80. Alana Warde and Lydia Martens, Eating Out: Social Differentiation, Consumption, and Pleasure (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).

- 81. Mary Blair-Loy, Competing Devotions: Career and Family among Women Executives (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003); Lillian Breslow Rubin, Families on the Fault Line: America's Working Class Speaks About the Family, the Economy, Race, and Ethnicity (New York: HarperCollins, 1994).
- 82. Berk, The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work in American Households .
- 83. Glenn, Issei, Nisei, War Bride: Three Generations of Japanese American Women in Domestic Service ; Hondagneu-Sotelo, Domestica: Immigrant Workers Cleaning and Caring in the Shadows of Affluence ; Katzman, Seven Days a Week: Women and Domestic Service in Industrializing America ; Mendez, ''Of Mops and Maids: Contradictions and Continuities in Bureacratized Domestic Works''; Palmer, Domesticity and Dirt ; Rollins, Between Women ; Sutherland, Americans and Their Servants: Domestic Service in the United States .

## Bio

Sabino Kornrich is a junior researcher at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences at the Juan March Institute in Madrid. He has published several articles on labor market inequalities in the American Journal of Sociology and Work and Occupations . His current research examines private households' consumption decisions, with a particular focus on inequality of consumption across households.