This article was downloaded by: [Florida State University] On: 04 October 2014, At: 18:16 Publisher: Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Labor History

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/clah20

'Chickens come home to roost': Industrial reorganization, seniority, and gender conflict in the United Packinghouse Workers of America, 1956-1966

Bruce Fehn

Published online: 28 Feb 2007.

To cite this article: Bruce Fehn (1993) 'Chickens come home to roost': Industrial reorganization, seniority, and gender conflict in the United Packinghouse Workers of America, 1956-1966, Labor History, 34:2-3, 324-341, DOI: 10.1080/00236569300890201

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00236569300890201

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary

sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/ terms-and-conditions

"CHICKENS COME HOME TO  ROOST": Industrial  Reorganization, Seniority,  and Gender  Conflict  in  the United Packinghouse Workers  of America,  1956-1966"

## by Bruce  Fehn

Capitalists  ve  indeed sed  women  as  unskilled, derpaid abor o  undercut ha u un l t male workers, et  this s  only  a case  of  chickens oming home  to  roost-a y i c case  of  men's  coaptation  y  and  support  f  patriarchal  ciety  ith  its  ierb o so w h archy  among  men, being  turned  back on  themselves  ith  a vengeance. w

Heidi  Hartmann  1

It  took  me  some time  to  get  up to  the  mike to  speak  because  I  was really full f  emotion  listening   Sister  ary Salinas  hen she  made her  speech. o to M w I  was afraid  hat ears ould have  come into y  eyes, nd then  to  listen  o t t w m a t the  other  sisters at poke,  one who  is  retiring d another  whom th s an I  have seen  around  this onvention or  years-I now that hese.., hree omen c f k t t w have  been  a  bulwark  of  our  union.   know that,  nd  to  see hat e are osing I a t w l or  are  about  to  lose hese omen,  I  am  telling u it lmost  brought  tears t w yo a to  my  eyes.

Ed Shanklin ~

Ed Shanklin  regretted  he  loss f  three talwarts  f  the  United  Packt o s o inghouse  Workers  of merica  (UPWA)A Mary Salinas,  attie  Gardner, H and Bessie  McCauley. They were among  thousands  of  women who  lost

Bruce  Fehn  is  sst.  rofessor  f ducation t UNY  Potsdam.  He received  is h.D.  in istory A P o E a S h P H from  the  Univ.  of  Wisconsin,  adison.  He is he uthor M t a of  Striking  men: Gender, Race, Wo and  Class n he nited ackinghouse  Workers  f merica, 938-1968 i t U P o A 1 (forthcoming  rom f the  Cornell niversity ess). U Pr

jobs  as  the esult  f  a  dramatic  echnological  d  geographical organir o t an re zation f  the  meatpacking ndustry  n  the  1950s  and 1960s. n  dozens  of o i i I plants,  he ntroduction    machines ed o  severe utbacks  n  operations, t i of l t c i and competition om a "new breed"  of  meatpacking  firms ccelerated fr a women's displacement.  s companies  transformed  he  production  roA t p cess, hey  fired workers d  women  were  the  first   go.    The proud  fet an o 3 male  membership  of  the nited ackinghouse  orkers,  however, ought U P W f management strategies  ich  eliminated  omen's jobs. hey fought n wh w T i the  union  hall,  n  the hop-floor, d  in  the ourts  o  keep  old obs nd o s an c t j a to  open  new ones  to  women.

Shanklin's  emarks  are  also ndicative   male  unionists'  spect  or r i of re f the  contributions    UPWA's  female  members.  Throughout  the  union's of history  en and  women  struggled  ogether  n  contests  ith  management m t i w over  wages and  working  conditions. ether  on picket ines  r  as  parWh l o ticipants   he nion's  owerful hop-floor ganizations,  n recognized int u p s or me women's  tenacity   strikes d  job  actions.   remember many times n in an "I o the  strike  ines," ion  member  George  Bouchard  told elegates  o  the l un d t 1966  international vention,  when I  saw cops  coming  with  clubs nd con " a I  would see  women  running oward  the  cops  and the  guys  running he t t other ay." any other ale  unionists d  recollections  women's  miliw M m ha of tant  ctivity  d  celebrated men's  high evel  f nion ctivism  nd  coma an wo l o u a a mitment.    However,  despite  he espect  en accorded hem, PWA 4 t r m t U women had to  confront  nion  brethren  s  well  as  packinghouse fficials  en u a o wh they  fought o  enter men's  departments"  n  the  mid-1960s. t " i

In  many UPWA union  locals, n rallied   defend omen  from  job me to w loss ue  to  the  technological and  ographical  eorganization    meatd ge r of packing. n  others,  en became hostile  s  women  used  Title  II  of  the I m a V 1964 Civil ights ct  to  gain  access o  jobs  traditionally  d  by  men. R A t hel Such  was  the ase n ttumwa,  Iowa  where  an  intense  onflict ok  place c i O c to between  women  and men of  UPWA Local  1.

The inter-gender  nflict at urfaced  n  Local  1  reveals  learly w co th s i c ho industrial  organization    meatpacking xposed  potential nflict re in e co em bedded  in  the  gendered  division  f  labor. n  Ottumwa,  veritable r o I a wa

between  the exes ook  place s  women  forced  he nion o  change  "male" s t a t u t and  "female"  ob ategories d  moved into "men's  bs"  n he ohn  Morrell j c an jo i t J plant.  hen  women  entered hese obs, en sabotaged heir  fforts  o W t j m t e t perform  them.  Furthermore,  omen  leaders  ere  harassed  ver he phone w w o t or  followed ome from  work.  One evening thel  Jerred,  eteran nion h E v u steward nd  a  leader f  the  Ottumwa women, returned  ome to  find he a o h t living  oom drapes orn down nd  red  paint pattered erywhere.  The r t a s ev ~ vandals nd  harassers  ere  intent  pon  sending o  Jerred nd  others  his a w u t a t message:  quit our  attempt o  enter men's  jobs" r  suffer  evere ony t " o s c sequences.

Historians  ave  shown how gender  was entrenched  nd  maintained h a in  production  ystems hrough ex-based  ob  classifications, erential s t s j diff wage rates,  r  dual eniority.    addition, they e  explored  he  ways  in o s In hav t which  male  union  officials,  well  as  rank-and-file, ticipated    the as par in creation  nd  maintenance  f endered ork  structures. rthermore, va o g w 6  Fu se eral istorians  ve  demonstrated  hat omen  sometimes  joined en in h ha t w m the  protection  f  sex-based ccupational  rrangements. o o a 7

At  other istorical  nctures,  wever, omen insisted nder as  the h ju ho w ge w key  factor  hat ade them  more vulnerable  han  men to  hiring,  firing, t m t or  job lacement  iscrimination. hese  imes omen clamored or hange p d At  t t w f c and  organized  o  break own the  gendered abor tructures.    the idst t d l s In m of  such  challenges,  nder ecame  a  prominent art f  working women's ge b p o self-identification. Women  loped hared  sensibilities hey  fought deve s as  t management  and union  rothers  o  defeat  ex-based  iscrimination he b t s d i t work  force. 8

UPWA women, as  they ost  obs n  the  1950s  and  60s, sed  women's l j i u activities mittees o  analyze  he ays  industrial  ansformation  de com t t w tr ma them  especially  lnerable  o ob  displacement.   local,  istrict,   invu t j At d and

7Alice essler-Harris, K A Woman's Wage."  Historical anings and Social  Consequences Me (Lexington,  990);  arol urbin, Beyond  Conventional Wisdom:  omen's Wage Work, House1 C T " W hold  Economic  Contribution,  d  Labor  Activism in  Mid-Nineteenth ntury orkingan a Ce W Class ommunity,"  in arole roneman and  Mary Beth  Norton, ds., C C G e To Toil  he ivelong t L Day: America's  Women  at  Work,  1790-1980, 46-67  (Ithaca, 87). 19

'Dorothy  ue  Cobble, 'Drawing the ne':  he Construction   a  Gendered  Workforce  in  the S " Li T of Food  Service  ndustry," in I Work Engendered, 216-242; ynthia ostello, orking  Women's C C "W Consciousness: aditional  r  Oppositional,"    Gronemann and Norton,  84-302;  Nancy Tr o in 2 Gabin,  "Time  Out of  Mind:  The  UAW's  Response o  Female  Labor  Laws and  Mandatory t Overtime in  he  1960s,"  n Baron, t i Work Engendered, 351-374.

ternational  onferences,  hey  announced that  "the  machine menace is c t stalking  ll  nion  members" and  demonstrated  ow the menace"  attacked a u h " "women's  jobs" irst. r  example,  women  showed that anagement, to f Fo m save  labor osts,  combined"  elements f  two "women's  jobs" o  create c " o t one  job  and  then laced   man on  it.   single  an's  wage  cost   company p a A m a less han  the  wages of  two women  at  work on separate  obs.    machine t j A was often  a part  of  such  "job  combinations."  n  addition,  omen  were I w confined o  the  first ree r four  lots  f  a  wage scale  hat ontained  et th o s o t c b tween  20 and  30  brackets.  hese unskilled    semi-skilled  bs ere  more T or jo w susceptible    replacement  y  machines  and  job  combinations than  illed to b sk "men's"  positions. men  who performed he  unskilled  nd  semi-skilled Wo t a jobs  were  more vulnerable  han  skilled  orkers  to  lay  off  during  times t w of  economic  contraction.  nally, WA Fi UP women  focused n  dual  seniority o as the  key ource  of their  disproportionate lnerability   job diss vu to placement.9

As in  the nited uto  Workers  0AAW),  United lectrical  rkers  (UE), U A E Wo and other  unions, he  link  between  job  segregation  nd dual  seniority t a systems  became a  primary  dilemma for PWA U women. They recognized that,  istorically, l  seniority otected  omen's jobs,  s  well  as  those h dua pr w a of  minority embers. However,  in  a situation  f  increased  ob  scarcity m o j women  also nderstood  hat ual  seniority s  a  prime culprit    women's u t d wa in vulnerability    job  retrenchment.  s in  other IO unions, ual  ("men's" to A C d and  "women's") eniority stems ere  a  fixture  f  most  UPWA s sy w o contracts.l° Separate eniority sts  ictated  hat  woman  laid ff ould  not  replace s li d t a o c a man even  though  she  had  more years n  a  plant han  her  male  counteri t part.  ince  changes  in  production  it irst d  hardest  n  food  processing S h f an i departments e.g.,  anning, ausage,  nd  sliced  acon) here  most  women ( c s a b w worked,  women  with  seniority  these epartments ere on the  streets in d w while  men with  lesser  eniority mained  on the job.  men's  seniority s re Wo was of  no help  since hey  could  not  transfer  rom the  departments nto t f i which they  were  originally red. s a result,  omen  increasingly eshi A w pr sured  union  leadership  o  negotiate  ingle  seniority.  s  would enable t s Thi them to  move into  jobs  in  traditionally  le departments. ma 11

UPWA's  international  adership sponded ympathetically    women's le re s to demands.  Compared to  leadership  n  other nions, resident  alph  Heli u P R stein  nd other  PWA a U officials  d  a  very ood  record n  women's  issues. ha g o 12

They recognized omen's loyalty  nd leadership  apabilities, ch had w a c whi been proved  n  the nion's  aily  kirmishes  ith  management in  the  1930s i u d s w and early  1940s.  So,  anticipating  rise in e  number of  women  in  the a th meatpacking  industry  n  the  post-World ar II  period, PWA i W U officials cultivated women's  ion  participation.  o encourage omen's  involveun 13  T w ment,  the  nion  created  omen's activities  mmittees nd  held  biennial u w co a conferences  n women's issues. o

Women used  these  forums  to  publicize  heir oncerns  and develop t c strategies    challenge  ender  discrimination.  men's voices  ere  heard to g Wo w throughout he  union  structure   they emanded and won  a 10  year ong t as d l struggle  o  attain  qual ay for  qual ork.  In  the qual ay  struggle men t e p e w e p wo enjoyed  the  wide  support f  union  brethren.  en  recognized  hat qual o M t e pay for equal  rk protected  ale wage  rates rom  being  undermined  by wo m f female  competition.  Furthermore, al  pay demands did  not  threaten equ the  gendered  division  f  labor.  ather, t equired  qual ay  for he  relao R i r e p t tively  ew  women  who performed men's  jobs.  '14  owever,  when women f " ' H began to  scrutinize d protest  ual  seniority sts, ey  issued  direct an d li th a challenge  o  "men's obs" nd  the  sex-based  ccupational  tructure   the t j a o s in industry.  his  new challenge ut  them in  direct mpetition  ith  men, T p co w and  UPWA officials  re  unable o  defuse he ender onflict at merged we t t g c th e in  some union  locals.

Women's close crutiny  nd criticism   UPWA's  prevailing  eniority s a of s system  was  bound  to reate  ensions.  was  the ase ith  other IO unions, c t As c w C institutionalization niority r  layoff  nd  rehiring  as  a  requirement of  se fo a w for nion  strength. fore PWA u Be U and  other  nions ad  established  niority u h se rights,  anagement frequently  ngaged  in  arbitrary ring nd firing.IS m e hi a Workers  had  no  firm ob  security,    management could ay ff homever j as l o w it hose. elma Otterman  of  Rath  Local  46  in  Waterloo, owa described c V I the  "mental  cruelty"  hat upervisors  t  the  Rath Company  directed  o t s a t older omen  in  the  1930s  before PWA w U organized he  plant n  1941  and t i enforced  seniority  ystem: a s

When there  as  going o e  a  lay-off, e..,  osses.., uld  walk  up  and w t b th b wo down the  aisle, d  these  lder  omen  would  put heir heads  wn and  just an o w t do

example,  Alice essler-Harris,  here are  the  Organized omen K "W W Workers?"  in  Nancy E Cott  and  Elizabeth  . Pleck, ds., H e A Heritage f er Own: Toward a  New Social istory o H H of  American Women, (NY),  347:  hilip  .  Foner, P S Women  and  the merican  Labor MoveA ment:  From the irst  rade  Unions  to  the Present F T (NY, 1980), 48-250; haron  Hartmann 2 S Strom,  "Challenging  Women's  Place': minism,  the eft, nd  Industrial  ionism in  he ' Fe L a Un t 1930s," Feminist tudies, S 9 (Summer  1983),  359-386.

work like  he evil.  hey'd oint t  one  and  talk o  each  other bout  [her]. t d T p a t a Then they'd  o  down and  look  at  the  other ables  nd point t  somebody g t a a [else].  at  w a s . . ,   ental ruelty,  I ld  call it, ause hese ld adies Th m c wou bec t o l had  to  have a ob. obs eren't  lentiful  en. nd the irst ing ou  knew j J w p th A f th y these lder nes  was  .  .  . d ff,  nstead  f  the younger  nes.  6 o o lai o i o o 1

Besides he  promise  of  improved  working  conditions  nd higher  wages, t a it as  job  protection forded  y  seniority ich  motivated any to  join w af b wh m the  Packinghouse  Workers.  7 1

Ironically,  e  particular pe  of  seniority stems hat he  Packingth ty sy t t house  Workers  and  management negotiated  ere  not  gender  neutral.  he w T union created nd enforced a department-based, rather han plant-wide t seniority  ystems,  s  Since  management  concentrated  omen,  Africans i w Americans,  and ethnic roups  in  certain  epartments,  he  departmental g d t seniority stems einforced  he  sex-,  ace-,  nd  ethnic-based gregation sy r t r a se of  labor n eatpacking  plants.  or  example, in ny plants,    dispropori m F ma a tionate  umber of  African-American omen  worked in  casings epartn w d ments,  where  they  flushed eces rom the  intestines   slaughtered  ivef f of l stock.  orkers  regarded hese obs s  the  worst n  a  packinghouse.  hite W t j a i W women,  on the  other  hand,  usually erformed  the  comparatively  lean p c and well  paid  slicing  nd packaging  operations  n  sliced  acon departa i b ments.  9  Department-based  eniority stems omplicated  frican-Amer1 s sy c A ican  women's  efforts   enter epartments here wages were higher  or to d w working conditions  etter. b

Why  did  union  pioneers  n he  1930s  and  40s  create  epartment-based i t d seniority stems,  hich  reinforced e acial  nd  sexual ivision  f  labor? sy w th r a d o Of course,  unions were male-dominated  labor  organizations  nd the a "ideology  f  sex-typing" iled  erceptions  f  this  iolation   egalitarian o ve p o v of principles  ntral  o ndustrial unionism.  wever,  the eaders  n he  1930s ce t i 2°  Ho l i t also perceived  tablishment  f  departmental,  ather  han  plant-wide, es o r t se niority  ystems s  a  requirement  or nion  strength  nd  solidarity    well s a f u a as as  job ecurity.  partmental eniority prevented  agement from  moving s De s man

workers  from  department  o  department s it w fit.  his  meant  a  comt a sa T pany  could not  hift  nion  activists  to epartments  here  they ould s u in d w w have less  seniority  nd be more subject o  layoff.  urthermore,  ince a t F s seniority  verned bidding  ights"  or obs,  t  revented  anagement from go " r f j i p m punishing nion  activists  rough  assignment o  less esirable bs  in  a u th t d jo department.21

Before ndustrial  structuring eatened bs n  women's  departments, i re thr jo i most  women viewed  departmental  eniority  vorably  ecause t rovided s fa b i p a  measure f rotection ring imes f  economic  contraction.    the  1930s o p du t o In and 1940s,  the  system  protected  women's  jobs" n, or  example, liced " i f s bacon,  from  layoff  n  male-dominated epartments  uch  as  beef ill.  t i d s k I meant  that   male  worker  with  considerable niority    that epartment a se in d did  not se  it  o bump" a  female orker ith ess eniority    sliced  acon. u t " w w l s in b In  addition,  orkers ith higher niority   a department lso ad  priw w se in a h ority  o  "bid" n  jobs ith  greater  kill, d  thereby  nter  ositions th t o w s an e p wi higher  pay.

Union enforcement f  departmental  eniority so rotected  omen o s al p w from  management's  discriminatory  b  placement ractices sed  upon jo p ba race,  ge, thnicity,    even ppearance. For  ample, elma  Wetzel,    shopa e or a ex V a floor eader f  Cedar Rapids  Wilson Local  3,  used  department-based l o seniority   protect  lder,  ore  senior,  omen  from  management efforts to o m w to  replace  hem  with  less enior,  ower  paid  women. Wetzel  recalled at t s l th in  the  1930s  management saved  money by  placing ounger, pretty  ew y " n girls"  n the ead trim  able head  of  workforce eterans.  fter PWA o h t a v A U established partmental  eniority,  wever,  workers  used  the  grievance de s ho procedure o  stop  the  practice.  llowed  women  at  Wilson  to  progress t Ita from the  worst  job  in  the  casings nd offal  epartment,  leaning  eces a d c f from  intestines,   better  ob  cleaning  tomachs even hough the tomach to  a j s ( t " s was full  f  'blah'"),  the et leaner  ob on  he ead  trim able.  lthough o to y c j t h t A bloody, ead trim  uty as  better  han xposure  o  feces  r  stomach blah." h d w t e t o " It also id  better  oney. 2  As long s  there  ere  enough  jobs n women's pa m 2 a w i " departments," men were  circumspect  bout  questioning e nion's  dwo a th u a herence o  departmental  eniority. t s

With the  eorganization    production  n  the  1950s  and  60s, owever, r of i h women  workers  stridently challenged er-based  tructures   producgend s of tion,  ncluding  ual  seniority.  w  meat  processors  uch  as  Cargill  nd i d Ne s a Iowa Beef  Processors  IBP)  streamlined  roduction  ethods,  and "old ( p m line ackers" uch  as  Swift, rmour, Wilson,  and John Morrell losed p s A c plants  r  altered oduction  n rder o  compete. omen  documented  how o pr i o t W jobs  in  "women's  departments"  ere  the  first  be liminated  y  the nw o e b i troduction  f  new meat processing  echnologies. rthermore,  hey  aro t Fu t

gued  that,  ince  ual eniority  evented  omen  from  moving into  men's s d s pr w " departments,"    ircumscribed men's  employment  options. al  seniority it c wo Du was  no  longer    source f ob  security,  d  prevented  omen  from  moving a o j an w into raditionally  e  departments  here  "men's obs" ere  available. t mal w j w By 1956,  women's  advocates  old UPWA membership  that  t cannot n cont i " i science  ee omen  with  7  or  more  years eniority    the treet while s w s on s m n with  less eniority   even  newly hired  men]  remain  on a  job  the  7-year s or [ woman  could  do.  '23 '

Local  unions responded   various  ays  to  women's  call  or ob  proin w f j tection. Some ganized  trikes d job ctions  o  pressure  ompanies  to or s an a t c quit iscriminatory  yoffs  nd support omen's efforts  o  remain  emd la a w t ployed. ath  Local  46 in Waterloo, wa conducted  plant ide slowR Io a w down in  the ate  950s  to ressure  he ompany  to uit ischarging men l 1 p t c q d wo workers.   At Chicago  Swift,  ocal  28 membership  refused  o  allow he 24 L t t company to  place  men  on jobs  from  which  women  had been  laid  ff. o "Hundreds  and  hundreds f  people walked  ut  because f  these omen's o o o w jobs  being  eliminated  nd turned  ver  to  the  men,"  reported    Local  28 a o a delegate  o  the  1958  international vention.    In  addition  o  walk-outs t con 2s t and job  actions,  ome local nions'  rievance ommittees  represented s u g c women  who lost obs  due  to  automation r  job  combinations.  Other j o 26 locals  nstituted icies ich  preserved  women's" nd "men's" bs ut i pol wh " a jo b opened  others  o  both  sexes.    For  example, fter    plant elocation st t 27 a a r co 60 women  their  obs  at  the  Kuehner acking  Company  in  Muncie,  Inj P diana,  ocal  105  negotiated ntracts  he ate  950s  which  "froze  obs" L co int l 1 j for omen and  identified  hers  s  open  either  o omen  or  men.  2s hese w ot a t w T efforts presented   attempt  o  simultaneously  otect  omen's  employre an t pr w ment and open new jobs  to  them.

The agitation   local  nions enerated   familiar  ebate n  the  hisof u g a d i tory f  working-class men: "Are  women  better  ff ith  'special treato wo o w ment' r  should hey nstead  truggle  e  'just ke  en.'? 9 hould omen o t i s tob li m "2 S w seek  to  attain "equality  ough eparation"   should hey  strive  o  be thr s or t t treated  he ame  as  male  co-workers?   In he ase f PWA t s 3° t c o U membership, deliberations  ntered  n  the ilemma  of  whether r  not ender-blind ce o d o g oc cupational  rrangements,  uch  as  single eniority sts, ened  jobs  to a s s li op women or  made them  more  vulnerable  isplacement   men or  machines. tod by

3°Cobble,  "'Drawing he  Line,'" 1;  Gabin, t 24 Feminism  in  the Labor Movement, 181-187.

Many women and  men argued hat reservation   dual  seniority  sts t p of li and sex-based  ob  categories re  necessary  o  protect  omen's  employj we t w ment.  A  few  UPWA members,  such  as  Goldie  Lamb  of  Rath  Local  46, believed  ual  seniority d  the  gendered ivision  f  labor as right  nd d an d o w a appropriate.   would never  do a man's  job," amb  declared.  If   was "I L " I a man I'd re een  made a man to  start with,   I  will ot  do a man's ' b and n job.  A  man is upposed  to be he  breadwinner.., d  he  deserves  hat s t an t job.  ,31 ,

Most UPWA members,  however,  did  not  accept amb's  devaluation L of  women's wage work.  Rather, hey  argued  that omen  were  equal to t w men, but  that omen  needed  special  rotection   order o  preserve  obs w p in t j and enhance  wages within the  gendered ivision  f  labor.  hey  believed d o T that,  t  a  time  f  shrinking  mployment  opportunities,  nder-based  ra o e ge a rangements rotected  women's  jobs" rom  male  encroachment.  urtherp " f F more,  they orried bout the aning  of  single  eniority  sts r he w a me s li fo t kinds of  jobs ompany officials  uld  assign omen. They  respected  he  conc wo w t ventional  istinction  tween "heavy"  nd  "light" male obs or en and d be a fe j f m women, respectively. y  believed  hat ith  single  eniority nagement The t w s ma would assign omen  to  heavy  jobs  in  the  hog or  beef ill  epartments; w k d jobs  they  aw as  too  physically manding for  women.  32 s de

UPWA's  African-American  omen, on the  ther and,  tended o  supw o h t port ingle  eniority  stsW hey  recognized  hat  ual eniority  rpetuated s s li T t d s pe racist  mployment  practices.  storically  st  victimized  y  discriminae Hi mo b tion  in  the  meatpacking ndustry,  PWA's  African-American  emberi U m ship ombatted ll  iscriminatory  ructures,  ether ender-  r  race-based. c a d st wh g o They  had  long xperience  ith he iscrimination  ich  accompanied he e w t d wh t combination f  job  segregation d enforcement   departmental niority o an of se provisions.  For  example, frican mericans  at he t. oseph, issouri 34 A A t S J M Armour plant raved hite acism o  enter  ll-white partments  hrough b w r t a de t use  of rievance  rocedures. wever,  blacks ho integrated partments g p Ho w de had  low  departmental  eniority d  were  the irst id ff hen gang  size s an f la o w was  reduced.    With  plant  ide, ingle  eniority  stems,  frican-American 35 w s s sy A

35Interview ith  Marjorie arter,  PWAOHP. w C U

women  believed,  lacks nd women  would have  a  greater  pportunity  o b a o t move into  other  departments ather han  face  lay  off. r t

As women  increasingly st obs  in  the  late 950s  and 1960s,  more lo j 1 and  more  UPWA members  converted  to  the  view that  only  single es niority  ystems  could  protect  omen's employment.  With the  introducs w tion  of  new machine  technology,  omen would remain  employed  only if w the  union  pursued ull  quality  n he  form  of  gender  blind ob  categories f e i t j and single eniority stems. or  example,  Ethel  Jerred f  John Morrell s sy F o Local  1  advocated  ingle  eniority cause,  s  a  matter f rinciple, men s s be a o p wo had the  right o  enter ny  job  in  the  plant: As a union  member,  you're t a " entitled   a  job  [in ine]  ith  your  seniority.  u're aying nion  dues.  '36 to l w Yo p u ' Advocates  of  single  eniority so ointed ut  that eparate  eniority sts s al p o s s li represented   divisive  trategy  hat anagement used  to  drive a  wedge a s t m " between  men and women  in  the  plant."  hey compared dual  seniority T to the  divisive ring nd  placement ractices ployers sed  before PWA hi a p em u U organized eatpacking  plants.  anagement used  these ractices to  ake m M p "m rivalries d jealousies  here none should  exist:  egro against hite, an w N w foreign-born  gainst merican-born,  Irish gainst olish, en  against a A a P m women.  ''aT

By the  early 960s,  technological velopments nd  the  geographical 1 de a reorganization   the eatpacking industry  hanced  the ower  of  women's of m en p demands for  full equality,  gle  eniority, d the  right o  enter ll obs sin s an t a j throughout   packing  facility.  tionwide, lant losings  r  cutbacks ea Na p c o r duced  total  mployment in  meatpacking  from  237,000 in  956  to  196,500 e 1 in  1963.  8  A  U.S.  Dept.  of  Labor  report  n  1960  estimated  hat,  at ura i t " c rent  production evels,  ew equipment  and new technology ave been l n h eliminating  ,000  packing obs   year.  'a9 creasingly,  men  with  a  con7 j a ' In wo siderable  mount of  seniority und  themselves ut  of  work,  while  men a fo o with  less eniority,    new male  hirees,  ook  any  "new"  jobs anagement s or t m created.

It was in e  economic  context f  UPWA th o women's increased  ulnerav bility  hat ongress  passed he  1964  Civil ights ct.  Established  n  the t C t R A i wake of  African-American rotest  ovements of  the  1950s  and 60s,  the p m law  offered  omen  a  new channel o  attack dual niority d  the  sexual w t se an division  f  labor. itle II of  the  Act specifically  de it nlawful  for o T V ma u employers  and labor nions  to  discriminate ainst  orkers  on  the  basis u ag w of  "race,  olor,  eligion, x  or national  igin.  4°  t lso reated  he  fivec r se or '' I a c t

member Equal  Employment Opportunity  ommission (EEOC)  to  field C and investigate  scrimination  arges. di ch 41

The creation  f  Title  II  significantly nged  the  political  ntext o V cha co of  working women's truggles r conomic  equality. oon after  EOC s fo e 42  S E commenced operations UPWA  women in  several  ocals  esieged  heir  nion b t u and  employers ith  threats  hat f ual  seniority stems ere  not  elimiw t i d sy w nated,  hey ould  proceed ith  lawsuits  harging  iolations   Title  II. t w w c v of V The Proceedings of  the  1966  international vention  onveyed  the  urcon c gency  of  the  situation:

On July ,  1965, itle VII   the ivil Rights Act  1964  became effective 2 T of C of and  suddenly  e found  ourselves heavily involved  despread problems. w in  wi Many plants in  ny  companies  had  substantial bers  of omen workers ma num w in  layoff atus  ecause f  separate  seniority clauses r contracts. st b o in  thei The new law  made such clauses illegal, he  ob  of  integrating  women to and t j in their rightfulplace in line  th heir  ength  f  service  nd  compliance ith wi t l o a w the aw  is till continuing.  By me his  eport  s ead,  e hope  that  ost l s the i t t r i r w m of  these problems ll  ave been solved  d  that  e will  ee  an  end  to  the wi h an w s harassment f  complaints,  lawsuits    mass  meetings  n  this issue. o and o 43

Under  constant  ressure from  grieved  emale embership, nd  the otenp ag f m a p tial  f  costly  awsuits, e nion  worked  quickly  ith  company officials o l th u w to  comply  with  Title VII quirements.   the  mid-1960s, PWA's  interre In U national  eadership barked  upon  a  good  faith  ffort  insure  men's em e o wo "rightful  ace"  n  a  newly  negotiated niority  stem hat  ould  replace pl i se sy t w dual  seniority.

The new seniority d  job  category  rrangements  hat PWA an a t U officials  egotiated presented  n  effort  imultaneously    promote  gender n re a s to equality,  eserve "women's  bs,"  nd  open  new jobs o  women. In  1965, pr jo a t union and  anagement  of wift nd  Company fashioned  he ABC" system m S a t " of  job  classification.  replaced  al  seniority stems ith  job  categoIt du sy w ries  dentified    "A",  "B"  and  "C." roup A jobs ere  "primarily   ini as G w of terest   males" ince  hey ere  either  eavy r  very hysically  manding. to s t w h o p de Group B  jobs  were  for women  because hey ere  comparatively ght  nd t w li a performed  under  relatively  od  working conditions. up C jobs ere go Gro w designated  s  open  to  both  sexes  because... th  the ormal  male  and a " bo n the  normal  female ould  be  qualified   perform  the obs r  learn hem w to j o t within    reasonable  ime."  here  were  provisions r omen  who wanted a t T fo w

1966,  Iv. talics ded. I ad

43Proceedings,

to  enter A" jobs  and  men  who wanted  to  enter B"  jobs. n  such  cases " " I the  employees  had  to  demonstrate hat  they re  "individually qualified t we for  the  job.  '44 '

Women's efforts  o  insure ompliance  with  the  new seniority stem t c sy demonstrates  ow "any  serious  hallenge  o  occupational  egregation  y h c t s b sex  could  potentially  tensify nder  conflict  n shop  floors  nd  union in ge o a offices  like.  4s   most  UPWA a '' In locals  here as a  turbulent  eriod f  adt w p o justment s  women  and their  ale allies  orced ompanies  and union  to a m f c restudy,  lter,  nd  reclassify  bs o  they ould be  erformed  by  women. a a jo s c p Some men resented  omen's efforts   exercise  ob  rights  nder  the BC w to j u A plan. s they itnessed  he ender  division  f  labor eteriorate, y laced A w t g o d the p obstacles  n  the  way of  BC's implementation.  he records f  women's i A T o efforts   attack  ex egregation  he ohn  Morrell lant  n ttumwa,  Iowa to s s att J p i O reveal  clearly  he  potential  agnitude of male resistance  o "serious t m t challenges,'    the  gendered  division  f  labor. n  addition,  vents n  Otto o I e i tumwa show  how women  developed    gender-based  ppositional  nsciousa o co ness  and identity  ithin he  context f  rapidly  hanging  economic  and w t o c political rcumstances. ci

As was the  case  in  other  UPWA locals,  ocal  1  women's challenge L to  the  sex-based  ivision  f  labor rystallized  John  Morrell ntroduced d o c as i machines  and  job ombinations  nto women's  departments.  6 ith  departc i " "4 W mental  or  dual  seniority stems n  place,  omen  lost  obs nd  men with sy i w j a less eniority  emained  in  the  plant. ohn Morrell  even  hired ew male s r J n workers  instead f  recalling  omen  already aid ff.    In 1965,  Local  1 o w l o 47 women  met in  their  omes to  challenge  orrell ompany's authority  o h M C t fire omen  workers  with  impunity. w

At first, e  Ottumwa women  went  to  their ocal  union  officers r th L fo help. his  was a completely ensible  ove. Ottumwa Local  1  was proud T s m of  its istory  s  a powerful, embership-based  organization, ich seh a m wh cured  a significant  asure  of  shop-floor  ontrol  nd good benefits  or me c a f women  and men.  4s  Furthermore, t ad a reputation  f  militancy  n bei h o o

half  of  membership.  Chief  steward  Virgil ankston  bragged  about  the B hundreds  of  walk-outs nd  job  actions  hich  took  place o  challenge  he a w t t company and  support  embers'  grievances. ocal  1  activist  wena Hornm 49  L Ro beck  recalled  hat the nion  used  to  take he  attitude at f ne  union t " u t th i o member was hurt  or...  discriminated  gainst.., en  the  whole union a th was hurt...  e  had a  very, ery  solid  nion.  '5°  fter he  war,  the  Local W v u ' A t continued o  absorb  women  into  its ppositional  tructure, d passed t o s an on to  new hirees  he union's litant  radition. ornbeck  remembered t mi t 51  H that anytime hey  had  a  walk-out r  a  slowdown,  anyplace n  that lant, " t o i p the  women  was right here eside  'em.  's2 t b '

Rowena Hornbeck,  Ethel  Jerred nd other omen  developed nto fa w i e fective  hop-floor aders  n  the nion's  teward system. rnbeck  became s le i u s Ho active  n he nion  soon  after  anding   job  at orrell's   the arly 940s. i t u l a M in e 1 Before  the  union  came to  the  plant,  ornbeck's ather  nd mother  both H f a worked there.  o did her  unts  and  ncles.  ornbeck's ather  ied  from S a u H f d injuries ffered  t  Morrell's  nd  the ork "about illed"  er  mother  too. su a a w k h As a single other  of  four  with  intimate nowledge  of  the  meaning of m k packinghouse  work, Hornbeck joined  the  Packinghouse  Workers Organizing  Committee right way in  the  early  1940s.  3 a 5

Ethel  Jerred lso ecame a loyal,  ctive  nionist  uring  World War a b a u d II. arly  in  the  war,  she  left  er  job  cooking  and cleaning or  wealthy E h f families  ho lived  n he  Court  Hill ection  f  Ottumwa. She  joined houw i t s o t sands  of  other omen  who landed  much  better  aid  work at  John  Morw p rell.  erred as among the  first  omen  hired uring  the  war to  work on J w w d "men's  jobs" n  the  kill, t, ffal,  nd  other men's  departments."   her i cu o a " In first b, he used    pitchfork  o  sling ow's ivers  nto oxes. By  the end jo s a t c l i b " of  the  day," erred ecalled,   don't hink   could  even  lift fork o  feed J r "I t I a t myself...   thought  I  was the  most abused  person  in  the  world,  and I I just new I  was never oing  back  again."  he  returned  he  next  day, owk g S t h ever. he recalled  hat pon picking p her  first  aycheck  for  $52.00  for S t u u p a week's  labor,  I  thought  I  was wealthy. " TM Jerred's  ork and union  exw perience ransformed er.  She recalled  hat hen her  husband  returned t h t w from  the  armed forces  fter World  ar II, e  found  his  wife  a  "changed a W h woman." Previously  shy  and retiring,"  she  rged from her  wartime " eme union  activity    an  "outspoken"  dvocate f orkers'  ights, d  this  eant as a o w r an m

"you  don't ook  at olor or x.  'ss ained in e igors  f  the ocal  nion's l c se ' Tr th r o l u steward ystem  Hornbeck,  Jerred,  nd  other ocal  1  women  became  tough s a L union fighters, d sure  of  their ights s  unionists. an r a

In  1965,  when Local  1  leadership iled  o  pursue igorously  omen's fa t v w demands to  return  o he lant,  ornbeck  and  Jerred  ed he omen's  attack t t p H l t w on the  gendered.division   labor. irst,  hey  instructed  omen  to  file of F t w grievances,    As stewards  in e  sausage  and sliced  acon departments, s6 th b respectively,  rnbeck and  Jerred  rote  "one  grievance fter nother" Ho w a a for  women  laid ff ut  of  line  ith  seniority.S7  ey  also obilized  omen o o w Th m w to  attend ocal nion  meetings  to  have  their  rievances  eard. owever, l u g h H union  officers ocked fforts   even  raise  he  issue f  women's  job  probl e to t o tection. e was always ut  of  order very ime  we opened  our  mouths," "W o e t Hornbeck recalled.  It as old  business,  ew business,  nfinished  usi-" w n u b ness, hen  we was  just  lain ut  of rder."  o  remove  procedural  bstacles, t p o o T o the  women  used  Roberts'  ules  of  Order  to  force onsideration  f  the R c o problem.  One night n  1964,  they acked  a  Local  meeting ith  50  women. i p w Hornbeck went  to  the  front f  the  hall nd asked  for a  point f  special o a " o privilege."  vote n  the oint as  taken nd the  omen  had  enough  votes A o p w a w to  pass t.  That's  ow I  got o alk t  11:30 ne  night,"  ecalled  ornbeck. i " h t t a o r H She stated  he  women's case, ut  the  women  felt  etrayed  y  the embert b b b m ship's  esponse.  The  union  said that's  e ay it s,'" called  ne  woman r " ' th w i re o bitterly.  t's  ood enough for  you.  'ss "I g '

In  the ace f  local  nion  intransigence,  men  decided o go utside f o u wo t o the  union. ne day, arly  n  1965,  30  women  assembled t Grace  oollum's O e i a W house. ware of  the  1964  Civil  ights ct's  rohibition ainst  ex iscrimiA R A p ag s d nation,  hey ontacted  he quality  pportunity  mployment Commission t c t E O E (EEOC)  in  Washington,  DC.  The EEOC advised hem to  contact David t Dutton,  a  lawyer n  Waterloo, owa.  After ooling heir oney for  legal i I p t m expenses,  he  women  drove  to Waterloo and red utton,  who, in  turn, t hi D approached PWA's  international officers  icago.  e informed PWA U in Ch H U officials  at they ced  legal ction nless he  union  implemented  polith fa a u t cies  hich  put ocal  1  in ompliance ith itle  II  of he ivil  ights ct.  9 w L c w T V t C R A s

Faced  with  a  potential wsuit, e nternational  ved quickly  o  have la th I mo t Local  1  implement  a seniority an  consistent  ith  the  ABC pl w guidelines established  arlier  in  gotiations th  Swift. nternational  presentae ne wi I re tives,  he  Local  1 bargaining oard,  and officers  f  John Morrell  met t b o numerous times  between  June  1965 and June  1966  to  develop  plan  aca

ceptable to e  women  and the  EEOC th officials.  gotiations  o identify Ne t "A,"  "B,"  and "C" jobs  were  slow nd difficult.  n  late ebruary  and a 6°  I F early arch 1966  the parties  et  continuously"  nd  agreed  upon a  plan M "m a to  implement  ABC and attain ompliance  with  Title II.  Ethel  Jarred c V participated    the  meetings nd recalled  hat we went over epartment in a t " d by department,  ob  by  job, nd job  descriptions,    see  what  would  fit j a to into  category,   category or category.  61  inally,  n March 21,  1966, A B C '' F o Local  1 announced to  membership that  the  parties  greed  upon an aca ceptable lan.  In  one week women  laid ff  would return o  the  plants. p o t Some would enter obs  in  departments here  no women had previously j w worked. The nion  called  pon membership  to  cooperate  n  the  new prou u i gram's  implementation. 62

The response  of  Local l's ale membership revealed he  explosive m t potential  ntrenched n  the  gendered  division  f  labor.  en  not  only  ree i o M fused  to  cooperate ith  the  implementation f  the  ABC w o system,  they sabotaged  women's efforts  o  perform  new jobs  that hey  entered.    In t t 63 the hog ill  epartment, or  example,  men conspired o  bid on ll he  C k d f t a t jobs. ccording  to  chief teward  Virgil ankston,  "every ime  a woman A s B t would try o  take  a  job  some bunch  of  guys  would  talk n  older  uy  into t a g bumping her  out, nd  the  first ing ou know  they're  ll ut  on  the treet a h y a o s again.  64  Furthermore,  en engaged  in  behavior hat  actually eatened " m t thr women's safety.    Ruth  Morrow recalled  hat,  n  the hog cut partment, ~s t i de "someone  who didn't  articularly  ink ou  should e  doing  that ob ould p th y b j w stand  there nd  throw  you  three f  those reat big gs  all t  once. here a o g ho a T was no  way you  could  keep  them from  falling f he able  n  the loor.  66 of t t o f ''

Ethel  Jerred  nd Rowena  Hornbeck  continued o  spearhead omen's a t w efforts  o  breakdown  the  sexual ivision  f  labor nd help  move women t d o a onto  traditionally  le  turf n  John MorreU.  67  From her  steward's  osima i p tion, ornbeck roamed her  department  to  make sure  that  each  women H safely erformed  the  job  she  was  assigned.  f ot,  Hornbeck sought  to p I n make arrangements for  ansfers   facilitated peration  etween  workers tr or coo b so  the  job  could  be erformed  without  danger  to  the  employee.  Hornp beck,  Jetted,  nd other  female  stewards rote  up dozens  of  grievances a w in  order to plement  the BC  system. owever,  the nion  did  not  followim A H u

up on  them.  8  The  grievances re  "thrown n he aste asket," cording 6 we i t w b ac to Ethel  erred.    Within wo  weeks  after  e-entering  e lant nder  the J 69 t r th p u ABC  plan, he  women  concluded hat nion  officers lluded ith  the t t u co w company to  prevent  he ood  faith  mplementation  f  the rogram. hey t g i o p T also etermined hat ocal  1  and  John  Morrell ad  decided o  keep  men d t L h t with  less eniority  the  job  at  the  expense  of  women. s on

Having arrived  t  these obering onclusions,   Ottumwa women a s c 21 returned  o  legal  hannels  fforded  y Title I. hey  instructed  eir  tt c a b VI T th a torney  o  proceed ith   lawsuit  gainst  PWA, t w a a U John  Morrell,  nd  Local a 1.  On April  13,  1966  a  U.S. arshal  informed he  International, al M t Loc 1, nd  John  Morrell hat  hey ere  charged ith unfair  mployment  praca t t w w " e tices  nder  the  Civil ights ct  of  Title  II." he suit harged hat he u R A V T c t t defendants  ailed   implement ingle  eniority  ich  resulted  iscrimif to s s wh ind nation  gainst  omen in lay  ff nd  recall actices.  rthermore,  he uit a w o a pr Fu t s demanded back  pay  and  benefits   July ,  1965, nd  enjoined  he  comto 2 a t pany  to  quit ex-based ob  discrimination. s j 7°

The prospect f  costly  awsuits, mbined  with  women's continued o l co agitation ainst  ender-based  mployment  discrimination,  ovoked  a ag g e pr full  iring  f he problem  f  women's  employment  at he ay 1966  intera o t o t M national  onvention.  t the  convention  elegates  roposed  and passed c A d p a  resolution ich  committed he  union  to  "full  nd  meaningful  ompliwh t a c ance"  with  Title VII d  "full  rotection r he  opportunity  f  women an p fo t o to  secure nd  hold mployment  in ccordance  ith  seniority.  1  eliberaa e a w ''7D tions n the  resolution veal hat ocal nions  throughout  he  country o re t l u t were  working  to  implement  new seniority  stems nder  the BC  guidesy u A lines. 72

The discussion  eveals  hat omen  and  men had  confirmed hat he r t w t t struggle  or quality  equired  onfronting eply eld  prejudices   well f e r c de h as as  entrenched,  ender-based  ob  structures.  legate eorge  Bouchard g j De G told male  elegates  he onvention  hat  hey ad  to  overcome  prejudices d att c t t h that mpeded  women's  efforts   attain  orkplace quality. hey  belong i to w e "T to  this rganization e  same as  you and I," ouchard  said: o th B

These women here tand  ide-by-side  th s when he ight  s oing n, ut s s wi u t f i g o b when it  omes  to   job omeone says,  on't  hink  hey re it  or t." at c a s "Id t t a f f i Wh is his  ased  upon?  Because ou  don't  ant  them  to ave  it, cause f our t b y w h be o y own self-preservation. tick together,   and  women  both, e believe We s men w in  no  discrimination  ainst any race, r r  sex. ag olo o 73

1966, 75.

71Proceedings,

Women  also alled  or nter-gender operation, t  appealed s  well c f i co bu a to  gender  solidarity   he truggle   defeat  he endered ivision  f abor. int s to t g d o l Before  ABC  controversies cked  the  union, omen  tended  to  frame  arro w guments  for quality  n  the anguage  of  class.  hey argued  for qual ay e i l T e p for  equal  work,  for  example,  in  terms  of  problems  and nterests ared i sh by all  union  members, men  and women  alike.  ather  than  dentifying R i women's "special  roblems,"  hey  pointed ut  that omen  "do  not  work p t o w for  loose hange  as  the  boss  ould have  you believe. c w We  work because we must  have  that  aily  aycheck.  '74 d p ' In  the  1950s  arguments  which  centered  around  female  solidarity d shared  interests ten urfaced,  ut an of s b they emained  subordinate  o  women's union nd  class  ommitments.  Howr t a c ever, t  the  1966  convention,    more gender-centered amework  is n  evia a fr i dence. or  example, irginia  ress  of Armour  Local  33,  Birmingham,  AlF V K abama told omen  delegates  hat unless omen  stand  up for  our  rights w t " w [and]  enforce  itle  II... obody  else  s oing  to. o I  say o  all omen, T V n i g S t w stick  p for  [your]  ights  n  all plants,   the nes  on  the  streets ghting u r i and o fi for their  ghts,  et  back  in  the  plant ven  if t s aking  man's  job.  '75 ri g e i i t a ' Women  left  he  1966  convention  etermined o  fight  o  save omen's  jobs, t d t t w and slowly  fashioned he  ABC t system  so  they  got  a fairer  hare  of  ems ployment  opportunities.

Unfortunately, werful  changes  in  the  meatpacking  industry  ade po m it ncreasingly fficult    protect  omen's  employment  through he BC i di to w t A system. resident  alph  Helstein  escribed  he  employment crisis  t  the P R d t a 1966  convention.  e observed hat  efforts mplement  ABC  guidelines H t to  i to  comply with  Title II  came V

at   particularly ficult  me..,  ecause..,    are ngaged  in,  nd  I think a dif ti b we e a it s extremely portant hat e understand  his ...  using  the  seniority i im t w t . system  as  a means of  dividing p u scarcity. There  just ren't  nough  jobs. a e Seniority  as never  designed or his  purpose,  t  this  s precisely t  it w f t bu i wha is eing  used  for n  this  ind  of  connection. d that s hat  gives ise  o b i k An i w r t so  much of  the  conflict at s  occurring. th i 7~

The job  "scarcity,"    which Helstein eferred,  eveloped  as  Swift,  Arto r d mour,  Wilson,  John  Morrell,  nd  several  arge  ndependents  losed  ozens a l i c d of  plants  n he raditional  ban  packing enters  uring he  1960s  and  1970s. i t t ur c d t

The "old  line ackers" hut  operations  n  an effort  o  compete  with p s i t a  "new  breed" f eat  processors  uch  as  Cargill, d  Iowa Beef  rocessors. o m an P The new operators  imultaneously  treamlined  roduction  ethods and s s p m set-up lants  n  areas utside  he traditional  king  centers  f  Chicago, p i o t pac o Omaha, Ft.  Worth  and  Kansas  City.r7  he old  packers ried  o  copy  the T t t

new strategies   order  to  compete.  Armour  was the  first  o  move. The in t company built  ew plants  n  rural  ommunities uch  as  Worthington, inn i c s M nesota,  hich  employed  far ewer orkers  than  the  old  facilities.  losed w f w It c 16  plants  n  Chicago, t. orth,  and Sioux  City between  956  and 1963. i F W 1 Over 12,000 rmour workers lost  eir  obs.  n  Chicago  alone,  000  workers A th j I 5 were  dismissed  hen Armour closed ts  lagship  lant.  ationwide, lant w i f p N p closings  r  cutbacks  educed otal  mployment  in eatpacking rom  237,900 o r t e m f in  1956  to  196,500  in  1963.  The loss f  about  41,000  jobs epresented o r a employment drop  of  nearly 7  ½ °70.78  he job  scarcity eated  y  the  new 1 T cr b forces f  production it omen  hardest n  Chicago,  Ft.  Worth,  Omaha, o h w i Ottumwa, and other  UPWA strongholds.

As was the  case  with  dual  seniority stems stablished   the  1930s sy e in and 1940s,  these conomic  developments ere  not  gender  neutral.  owe w H ever, iven he  changed  political context exemplified le  II,  women g t by  Tit V challenged endered  occupational  tructures ich had  been  taken  for g s wh granted.  ather  than  working  to  protect  obs nd foster  mployment opR j a e portunities within the  gendered ivision  f  labor,  omen  demanded equal d o w access o  "men's  jobs," r  any other obs, nside  packing  facility. t o j i a 79

In  the  words  of  Heidi  Hartmann, the  "chickens ad come home to h roost. 8°  he failure  o  prevent stablishment  f  gender-based  ob  struc'' T t e o j tures at e  outset f  UPWA th o history  llowed he  sexual ivision  f  labor a t d o to  become entrenched.  hen  the  meat  industry  ntroduced  ew producW i n tion trategies,  men demanded access  o  jobs hroughout  he lants  nd s wo t t t p a elimination  f  dual  seniority stems hich  discriminated  gainst  them. o sy w a Union  men responded ith  efforts   preserve  en's  employment  privileges. w to m Women protested,  en  failed o compromise, and the  ensuing  battle m t weakened  union  solidarity  st as w corporate  trategies  allenged  he ju ne s ch t union's ery  survival. v

S°Heidi  Hartmann.