This article was downloaded by: [Simon Fraser University]

On: 11 November 2014, At: 13:42

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Scandinavian Economic History Review

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:

http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/sehr20

## Allocating job losses: the mass layoffs at the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly in 1921

Tobias Karlsson a

a Department of Economic History and Centre for Economic Demography , Lund University , Box 7083, 220 07, Lund, Sweden Published online: 09 Jun 2010.

To cite this article: Tobias Karlsson (2010) Allocating job losses: the mass layoffs at the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly in 1921, Scandinavian Economic History Review, 58:2, 100-118, DOI: 10.1080/03585522.2010.482290

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03585522.2010.482290

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

<!-- image -->

## Allocating job losses: the mass layoffs at the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly in 1921

Tobias Karlsson*

Department of Economic History and Centre for Economic Demography, Lund University, Box 7083, 220 07, Lund, Sweden

This article analyses the mass layoffs carried through by the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly in 1921. As a state-owned enterprise, the Tobacco Monopoly was expected to treat its employees with particular care but was not restricted by formal rules regarding the order of selection. Drawing on both qualitative and quantitative evidence, it is shown that the company's layoff policy shifted dramatically over the course of the year. In the spring, the company acted according to existing praxis and applied the seniority principle when releasing workers. In the autumn, when machines for cigar production were about to be installed, the same principle was abandoned. This policy shift should be seen in the light of technological change. As cigar machines were introduced, the company no longer needed experienced workers for training new workers. The seniority principle for layoffs was never applied again in the industry for the rest of the inter-war period.

Keywords: layoffs; tobacco industry; labour management; downsizing; Sweden; twentieth century

## Introduction

Personnel reductions are achieved in a variety of ways. Companies downsize their workforces by natural attrition, buyouts, early-retirement schemes, releasing workers hired on temporary terms or laying off permanent workers. The last measure is the most dramatic method since it inevitably involves a delicate issue of selection: who is to be retained and who is to be released? In modern economies the allocation of job losses is often restricted by law. 1 Employment protection legislation expanded substantially in most European and the Anglo-Saxon countries during the period 1964 to 1978. 2 The Swedish employment protection legislation, which dates from 1974, basically stipulates that if employers and unions do not make other agreements, the order of selection should be based on seniority according to the principle 'last in, first out'. 3 This was probably not an institutional innovation but rather a codification of a principle already included in many collective agreements. In fact, recent historical research has highlighted evidence of seniority as a layoff criterion in collective agreements from the inter-war period and before. 4 However, little is known about how the order of selection was established in practice in those days. From modern studies we know that the outcome of personnel reductions is largely determined by informal procedures, for example, how layoff units are defined. It should furthermore be remembered that most firms in the inter-war period were

not restricted by formal rules regarding layoffs. According to contemporary observers, seniority could be applied in those cases as well, but there were also competing conceptions of fairness.

In this article I investigate the personnel reductions of the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly in 1921. The article represents the first detailed account of layoff practices and criteria in an individual firm in the Swedish inter-war context. Overall, there are, to my knowledge, very few similar studies, and in contrast to these I try to bring together qualitative and quantitative evidence into a comprehensive story. 5 The article may therefore be of value not only for those interested in the Swedish labour market of the inter-war period, but also for those interested in layoff procedures in a more general sense. I have not chosen the Tobacco Monopoly as a representative of typical Swedish companies of the era. It should rather be seen as benchmark. As a state-owned company it was expected to treat its workers with particular care, although it was not restricted by formal rules regarding the order of selection. Thus, the case study gives us an idea of how an employer should implement layoffs in order to be considered socially responsible. It is also likely that the practices of a company such as the Tobacco Monopoly influenced the behaviour of companies in other industries. State-ownership meant that it often was the subject of political debates and therefore the conditions in the tobacco industry became better known than its size justified.

The downsizing of the Tobacco Monopoly was initiated as a response to declining consumer demand and labour-saving technology. I show that the company's layoff policy shifted dramatically over the course of a year. In the spring, the company acted according to existing praxis and followed the seniority principle when releasing workers. In the autumn, when machines for cigar production were about to be installed, the same principle was abandoned. This policy shift should be seen in the light of technological change. As cigar machines were introduced, the company no longer needed experienced workers for training new workers. The seniority principle for layoffs was never applied again in the industry for the rest of the inter-war period.

The article begins with a review of the research literature on the order of selection at layoffs. This part includes a theoretical discussion and empirical evidence, the latter with particular reference to Swedish conditions. Thereafter I describe the downsizing process carried through by the Tobacco Monopoly. I begin the investigation of the layoffs in 1921 by looking into the statements made by the involved actors and using qualitative sources. With this in mind and by using logistic regression analysis, I go on to a quantitative investigation of how the layoff risk was related to individual characteristics. The latter endeavour is based on data from the personnel records of Malmo Cigar Factory.

## Productivity, seniority, needs and status

There are many possible principles for allocating scarce jobs, but the following four groups of criteria are commonly used: productivity; seniority; needs; and status. 6 Of these criteria, productivity is of central importance for the employer. In order to maximize profits, or just to secure the continuation of the business, the employer will allocate jobs to more productive workers before less productive ones. As will be

further discussed below, productivity is not always observable at the individual level and is often supplemented by other criteria reflecting equity considerations.

Apart from productivity, length of service /C1 seniority /C1 is probably the most widely applied selection criterion at layoffs across time and space. 7 As recently noted by Mats Glava ˚ and Berit Bengtsson, seniority also mattered in inter-war Sweden. 8 Length of service was the most commonly mentioned layoff criterion in collective agreements and was often used as a modifying principle even when formal rules were lacking. 9 That is, workers with long tenures were exempted when the order of selection was established; thereafter the selection proceeded by applying other criteria to the remaining workers. It was also noted that unions, not content with this practice, demanded a strict application of 'last in, first out' and were often successful in that respect. The Saltsjobaden agreement of 1938, which prescribed that length of service should be considered when selecting between workers of equal ability, was therefore not seen as a major improvement by some unions. 10

Although the most common principle along with productivity, seniority was not the only existing layoff criterion of importance in the inter-war period. An alternative was what may be termed 'the need principle', 11 according to which jobs were to be allocated to those who would suffer most from job losses. 12 This principle was more difficult to apply in practice since it could include several dimensions, such as individuals' opportunities in the labour market, their economic situation, as well as their obligations towards relatives. By the mid-1930s, maintenance obligation had been mentioned as a selection criterion in the collective agreements of 5 out of 40 unions in the Swedish Confederation of Labour (LO) and was de facto applied in eight other trades. 13

In the inter-war period, the need principle often interacted with gender and marital status. 14 The prevailing male breadwinner ideal prescribed that married men should be protected from unemployment. Married women, on the other hand, were supposed to take the main responsibility for household work. Since married women were supported by their husbands, they should be the first to go in personnel reductions. It is unclear to what extent this ideal was applied in practice. Some union leaders were personally in favour of the male-breadwinner norm, but preferred a strict application of the seniority norm in practice. One reason for this was the fear of infringements of personal integrity if employers were to scrutinize the family situation of each worker. 15

Gender and family situation are not the only status dimensions of potential importance for layoffs. Age, for example, is a criterion often applied in personnel reductions. 16 Other examples of status dimensions are terms of employment, union membership and residency. The workforce may be segmented into groups with different types of contract. The simplest case is to have a core of workers hired on a permanent basis and a periphery of workers with temporary contracts, but there may also be cases with more complex segmentation. In their attempts to control the labour supply, some unions seek to exclude non-members from entering occupations. In the most extreme form, the closed-shop system, only union members are allowed in the workplace. In other cases, unions have succeeded in reserving job opportunities for members. 17 Preference may also be given to those workers who reside on the workplace location. 18

Layoffs are seldom governed by only one criterion. The selection procedure more often includes several criteria. 19 A common approach to weighing together criteria is

to select workers in two stages: by first establishing so-called layoff units and then the order of selection within each unit. The layoff units may be defined more or less widely. At one extreme, all workers in a company comprise a unit while units are composed of workers with the same tasks at the other extreme.

Having established the existence of various principles for allocating jobs in downsizing firms, the next question is how to explain why a certain principle or, more commonly, a certain combination of principles is used in a given context. This task is best approached by identifying the actors in the downsizing process and their incentives, before studying their interaction. 20

It is a well established empirical fact that unions generally want layoffs to be governed by straight seniority /C1 according to the principle 'last in, first out'. 21 This was also the case in inter-war Sweden. 22 There are several explanations for this position. Compared to productivity and needs, length of service appears to be a clear and easily observable criterion. For individual workers the seniority principle makes it possible to calculate the likelihood of losing the job in the event of a personnel reduction. Layoffs according to clear and objective rules are also of strategic importance for unions. 23 In the absence of rules, employers can take the opportunity to get rid of unionized workers when conducting workforce reductions. In general, collective action is complicated if workers constantly have to win the approval of foremen in order to keep the job. The foremen's discretion increases competition among workers and puts a downward pressure on wages.

Whereas unions often strive for strict seniority, managers put more emphasis on ability. Managers' preference for high-performing rather than low-performing individuals is self-evident, but in some contexts it is not possible for managers to distinguish between productive and unproductive workers. Some researchers regard the application of length of service as a rule of thumb for identifying the most productive workers. The idea stems from human capital theory, according to which workers become more productive through on-the-job training. 24 To the extent that employers have invested in on-the-job training, they will be reluctant to release senior workers. This is particularly relevant for those workers who have been trained in idiosyncratic tasks, since they are hard to replace if there is a need for more labour in the future.

This intuitive rationale for seniority-based layoffs has been criticized by Lorne Carmichael, who argues that when human capital grows with experience managers maximize profits by following the principle 'first in, first out'. 25 If recessions are used to train young workers, the firm will have a productive workforce when product demand resumes. Edward Lazear has also questioned the traditional way of using human capital theory for explaining layoffs. 26 He emphasizes that the employer does not only want to keep the most profitable individuals but the most profitable mix of workers, and that the optimal policy depends on technological change and skill requirements.

When establishing the order of selection at layoffs, employers cannot only consider their own preferences, but also the workers' preferences. The bargaining position of the workers depends on a number of factors, such as union density, the union's funds and political support and the general situation in the labour market. 27 With regard to Sweden before 1940, Bengtsson has shown that clauses concerning the order of selection, and other limitations of the employer's discretion, were more common in phases with low levels of unemployment. The same clauses were often

removed in recessions, when the unions' bargaining positions were weaker. Knowledge of the work process is also a fundamental power resource. Since experienced workers are more difficult to replace, their interests are more likely to influence personnel policies. This is particularly the case if knowledge and skills are firmspecific and can only be acquired through on-the-job training.

On-the-job training is characterized by its informal nature. 28 It usually takes place within the production process and instructions and assistance are provided by experienced colleagues. Thus, senior workers have dual roles in the firm, devoting time and effort to producing output and teaching new arrivals the secrets of the trade. In some cases the two activities are certainly complementary, for example when new arrivals can help their more experienced colleagues by doing routine work. However, there may also be instances where the two roles come into conflict. Assisting and supervising new arrivals takes time and may imply lower productivity, which is especially problematic if pay is based on individual performance. Furthermore, new arrivals are potential competitors for future jobs. By participating in skill-transmission, experienced workers may undermine their own position. If they fear that they will be replaced by newcomers, senior workers will refuse to participate in, or even sabotage, the training process. As has been suggested by Lester Thurow and Patricia Reagan, employment protection based on seniority may be seen as a way for firms to induce the cooperation of experienced workers. 29 Thus, the principle 'last in, first out' is likely in work processes where skills are firm-specific and acquired through on-the-job training.

Amongst other things, this article illustrates what happens with the layoff policy when experienced workers abruptly lose their function in the training process due to technological change.

## The downsizing of the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly

In the summer of 1915 production of tobacco goods in Sweden was taken over by a joint-stock company with the state as the majority owner. 30 The nationalization was for purely fiscal reasons and can be seen against the backdrop of welfare state expansion and the imminent need of rearmament. Half of the Tobacco Monopoly's board members, including the chairman and a so-called director on duty, were appointed by the state and the other half, including the managing director, by the private owners. Hence, the latter group had a significant influence in spite of being minority owners. Between 1915 and 1929 the position of managing director was held by Oscar Wallenberg, a member of the famous Wallenberg family, who previously had served in the navy. His mixed background, with experience from both private and public organizations, is likely to have shaped his approach to the downsizing process.

The Tobacco Monopoly was surrounded by an institutional framework that aimed to strike a balance between profit maximization and social responsibility. On the one hand, the business was to be managed efficiently; all opportunities for cost-saving measures were to be taken, reflecting that the ultimate purpose of the company was to deliver incomes to the state. On the other hand, when deciding to nationalize, the politicians had made some concessions to those involved in the industry. Interestingly, not only the former factory owners but also workers made redundant in connection with nationalization were granted compensation. The state

representatives on the board also had instructions to let social considerations shape the personnel policy. 31

The compensation and pledges about social responsibility were partly due to the pressures of the Tobacco Workers' Union, an organization which was open for all occupations and organized a very high share of the workers in the industry. 32 By 1904 the Tobacco Workers' Union had already managed to attain a collective agreement with national coverage. After monopolization, the union made some moves to strengthen the employment protection, which were partly successful, but would not result in any explicit rules concerning the order of selection at layoffs. However, there appears to have been an implicit seniority norm in the initial phase of the company's history. 33 Layoffs that did not take place according to strict seniority led to protests from the union. While the management did not deny that length of service was a criterion of relevance, it also wanted to consider other aspects, such as ability, skills and loyalty. Its position was similar to the one later codified in the Saltsjobaden agreement, as is shown by the following statement, made to the union in 1920:

We are in full agreement with you that, when no distinction can be made regarding the capacity for work and behaviour, the most recently hired workers shall be the first to be laid off when shortage of work occurs. 34

The tobacco industry of the early twentieth century consisted of five distinct branches /C1 cigars and cigar-cigarettes, snuff, rolling-tobacco, smoking-tobacco and cigarettes /C1 each characterized by its own production methods and technologies. Whereas machines were used to manufacture snuff and cigarettes, cigars and cigarcigarettes were rolled by hand or with the help of wooden moulds. The cigar branch was by far the most important with regard to employment. Basically, the work process in this branch consisted of three steps: preparation work; manufacturing; and sorting. Preparation work meant sorting, fermenting, moistening the raw tobacco and removing the stems from the leaves. Thereafter the cigar was rolled, either by hand or with the help of moulds. After rolling they were sorted according to colour and quality and packed into boxes. With few exceptions, these steps were done manually. Preparation work was considered to be fairly simple, whereas cigar makers and packers were regarded as skilled workers. Before nationalization, entering the skilled occupations required going through a period of apprenticeship. In those days, the apprentice system was regulated in collective agreements but after nationalization training became increasingly informal.

Over the course of the nineteenth century, cigar production became feminized and about 80% of the workers in the cigar factories were women when the Tobacco Monopoly began its activities. The female dominance was greatest in the preparation process, while there were still some male cigar-rollers. These remaining men had a strong position in the Tobacco Workers' Union; for example, all seats in the union's executive committee were held by men until 1933. 35

The initial years of the Tobacco Monopoly's existence were characterized by strong demand for tobacco goods. At the end of 1919, the company employed 5,546 blue-collar workers, which was a higher number than had ever been recorded in the pre-monopoly era. The strong demand increased the incentives to introduce laboursaving technology and in August 1920 the management ordered 80 cigar machines from the United States. The potential of the new technology was tremendous. While

a worker could produce 35 cigars per hour by hand, a machine could produce 400. 36 Since each machine had three operators, labour productivity was almost fourfold. In its initial phase, mechanization mainly affected the actual manufacturing tasks, rather than the preparation work, and had a deskilling nature. 37 While it took years of training for cigar makers to attain skill and pace in rolling by hand, the training period for machine operators was counted in months or weeks. 38

Somewhat later in autumn the same year, before the machines had been delivered, the first signs of a recession were seen. In particular the demand for cigars fell dramatically as consumers switched to cheaper cigar-cigarettes. The downturn meant that hundreds of cigar workers became redundant and the problem became even more pressing as the American machines were delivered and installed over the course of the year. From 1920 to 1928 the number of workers employed in the cigar factories was cut by 60%. Data from one of the company's cigar factories indicates that layoffs accounted for 49% of the workforce reductions, attrition for 38% and induced quits for 13%. 39 The layoffs were not evenly spread out over the period but were concentrated to 1921, when workers were released en masse . This is illustrated in Figure 1, which summarizes the number of layoffs at one of the cigar factories annually. Although there were some workers hired on temporary terms at the beginning of the downsizing phase, this group was small. Workforce reductions therefore mainly affected permanently employed workers.

An aspect of the Tobacco Monopoly's downsizing process worth noting is that the management was not forced by financial difficulties to undertake reductions. The company's profits were high throughout the 1920s, even during the depression year 1921. 40 By 1924 the accumulated dividends were already higher than the total costs associated with nationalization and over twice the size of the invested capital. That reductions of considerable magnitude were made illustrates the management's wish to act according to rational business conduct. The Swedish Tobacco Monopoly was more similar to a profit-maximizing firm than a state bureaucracy. Social responsibility was not mainly articulated in the form of employment protection but in how redundant workers were compensated and in how the order of selection was motivated.

Figure 1. Number of layoffs due to shortage of work at Malmo Cigar Factory, 1915 /C1 1939. Source: Malmo stadsarkiv (MS), Frans Henrik Kockums tobaksfabriks arkiv (FHK), Matriklar o ver slutade arbetare, D4A: 1 /C1 8.

<!-- image -->

## Statements about the order of selection

The first major personnel reduction carried through by the Tobacco Monopoly was launched in March 1921. 41 The management's initial proposal was, in line with the theoretical reasoning of Carmichael and Lazear, to cut at both ends of the age distribution by pensioning off old workers and laying off young workers. The former measure was not accepted by the board since there was no pension system in place. The board also wanted the management to have talks with the union about the layoffs. These talks led to a declaration by managing director Oscar Wallenberg that the layoffs would affect 'the youngest of the most recently hired' at the cigar factories. 42 This was an acceptable outcome for the union and the order of selection did not raise further discussion. Apart from being young and recently hired, all of the 400 workers that were laid off in April 1921 had one thing in common: they were women. To judge from the records of the company board, the gender aspect of the reduction was not discussed at all; no distinction was made between male and female workers. Whether this outcome was a result of a conscious choice, made by the company management or jointly with union representatives, or if it simply reflected the age composition of the workforce cannot be determined from the qualitative sources.

The second big reduction was implemented in October 1921. Again, the management wanted to cut both ends of the age distribution, which also was possible this time since a detailed pension proposal had been prepared. 43 Apart from deciding how many workers to lay off /C1 men and women in different age groups and at different locations /C1 the company board did not give any further instructions to negotiate the order of selection with the union. One can only speculate why this procedure was demanded in March, but not in September the same year. Probably, the personnel reduction was overshadowed by other important issues, such as the pension scheme. Another factor to take into account is simply that the depression was now in a later stage, with personnel reductions being carried through everywhere in the labour market and the union was in a weak position. Just like employers in other industries, who managed to delete the formal limitations of their freedom to hire and fire workers in collective agreements during the depression, it is likely that employers took the opportunity of getting rid of informal constraints, such as the seniority principle. Anyway, the management got the go-ahead from the board and 360 workers were laid off.

When informed about the measure, the union leaders unanimously rallied round the principle 'last in, first out'. 44 In fact, to judge from the records, it seems like the union leadership thought that this principle actually was stipulated by the collective agreement, which was not the case. This was hardly a matter of a temporary mistake; the same idea appeared in the following meeting, where it was decided to 'uphold the rule in the collective agreement that, at times of shortage of work, the last hired is dismissed first'. 45 Thus, the seniority norm was so strongly rooted in the minds of the union leaders that it was believed to be a formal rule.

If the huge workforce reduction in the spring 1921 went almost unnoticed in the management /C1 union correspondence, the layoffs in October the same year did not. In a letter to the management some weeks after the reduction, union chairman Albin Kindstrand wrote the following:

As we have previously notified . . . there is strong discontent among the workers on account of the most recently carried out layoffs at the Tobacco Monopoly. The discontent is particularly directed towards the failure to observe common practice in that adult workers with long tenure have been laid off. 46

The management did not deny the abandonment of the seniority norm, but explained that it had regarded 'dependency burden and family situation', 'age' and 'physical constitution' as criteria affecting the order of selection. 47 In cases where these criteria had not given clear guidance, the company had considered the worker's occupational competence. These criteria had, in the management's view, resulted in the dismissals of primarily younger workers without maintenance obligations. Regarding the accusation of discrimination against foreign workers, the management answered that these were few and had been treated no differently to workers of Swedish nationality. Somewhat later, the management added that it could make no further pledges than to keep the most qualified workers in the future.

From the statements of the involved actors it may be established that the Tobacco Monopoly's layoff policy underwent a dramatic change in 1921. After negotiations between the management and the Tobacco Workers' Union, the order of selection at the reduction in April was established according to age and length of service. No such negotiations were held in the autumn, and although age was used to define layoff units on this occasion, length of service was not mentioned. The abandonment of the seniority principle can be understood from the perspectives of power and economic theory. Considering the general situation in the labour market, with previously unseen levels of unemployment among unionized workers, the management could break informal fairness norms without risking costly conflicts. The workers were upset but could hardly resort to the strike weapon. It is interesting to note that the management referred to the depression when announcing the layoffs to the union in September, although the most important reason for the reduction certainly was labour-saving technology. 48 It obviously preferred to motivate the harsh measures with external circumstances rather than with the own decision to introduce machines. From the perspective of economic theory it is clear that the management's incentive to apply length of service as a layoff criterion was weakened. Mechanization, the ultimate cause of the layoffs, meant that the skills of the more senior workers became obsolete. They no longer had an important role in the training process. Still, it was important for a state-owned enterprise to maintain a certain fairness in its labour relations. Thus, the management claimed to have considered the need principle (disabilities and family situation) when establishing the order of selection. 49

A lot can be learnt about layoff processes from studying the interplay between trade unions and employers, as it is revealed in material like correspondence, board and negotiation minutes. However, the qualitative accounts leave some questions unanswered, for example: Did the statements made by the actors correspond to reality? What was the relative importance of various criteria? Were there other criteria than the ones mentioned? These questions call for investigations of another kind. The remaining part of the article analyses the outcome of the layoffs quantitatively. This is done by using data from the personnel records of Malmo Cigar Factory, first by means of cross-tabulation of how the layoffs were distributed

according to sex and age, and then by logistic regression analysis where the effects of several variables are included.

## Layoff risks experienced by workers employed at Malmo Cigar Factory

Malmo Cigar Factory was one of the Tobacco Monopoly's three establishments for cigar and cigar-cigarette production. It employed about a third of the workforce in the branch and a fifth of the company's total blue-collar workforce at the end of 1920. The personnel records are composed of forms with information on each worker, 50 including name, number, date of marriage, date of childbirths, date of entrance, date of exit, job title, months worked annually, annual earnings, etc. From a database covering all workers employed at the factory at some time between 1915 and 1939, cross-sections have been made for the periods immediately before and after the two personnel reductions in 1921.

Table 1 gives an overview of how the layoffs on each occasion affected male and female workers of different age groups, and confirms much of the qualitative evidence presented above. The layoffs in April 1921 hit young, female workers, whereas the layoffs in October affected old workers of both sexes as well. A closer investigation of the statistics shows that there were very few male workers under 25 years of age in 1921, which is probably the reason why gender was not discussed in connection with the reduction in April. If a substantial number of young and recently hired workers was about to be released, it followed automatically that the layoffs would affect women. Furthermore, the statistics reveal that, with a few exceptions, all the men over 60 years of age and all the women over 55 were laid off in October 1921. It was not a matter of selecting which of the workers in these groups to retain and which to release.

Although important for defining layoff units, age and gender were not the only criteria of possible importance for the layoffs in 1921. The next step is to take more variables into account. This calls for logistic regression analysis, which is a commonly used technique for investigating how the probability of an event is

Table 1. Profiles of workers laid off from the Malmo Cigar Factory according to sex and age. ¨

|            | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   | Age group   |
|------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
|            | 5 24        | 5 24        | 25 /C1 34   | 25 /C1 34   | 35 /C1 54   | 35 /C1 54   | ] 55        | ] 55        | All ages    | All ages    |
|            | T           | L           | T           | L           | T           | L           | T           | L           | T           | L           |
| April 1921 |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| Men        | 38          | 8           | 23          | 0           | 100         | 0           | 51          | 0           | 212         | 8           |
| Women      | 580         | 154         | 144         | 0           | 151         | 0           | 28          | 0           | 903         | 154         |
| Oct 1921   |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| Men        | 23          | 11          | 29          | 3           | 97          | 0           | 41          | 29          | 190         | 43          |
| Women      | 386         | 78          | 162         | 9           | 142         | 1           | 24          | 22          | 714         | 110         |

Note: T /C30 total number of workers in the category; L /C30 number of layoffs in the same category.

Source: MS, FHK, Matriklar o ver slutade arbetare, D4A: 1 /C1 8.

related to a set of independent variables. 51 In formal terms, the logistic model can be expressed as follows:

$$Prob Y ¼ 1 = X ð Þ ¼ exp b 0 þ b 1 X ð Þ = 1 þ exp b 0 þ b 1 X ð Þ/C138 ½ (1)$$

where Y is a dependent variable that can either take the value of 1 or 0, b 0 is a constant, and b 1 is vector of coefficients associated with X , a vector of independent variables. The event of interest, the dependent variable, in our study is whether a worker is laid off (1) or not (0) on a given occasion. The independent variables consist of a range of individual worker characteristics that, based on theory and qualitative evidence, may be expected to affect the probability, or risk, of being laid off.

Since the layoffs in April and October 1921 were concentrated on young, female workers, the regression analysis in this section concentrates on identifying the criteria that were important for selecting workers within this group. 52 The research strategy is to estimate the same empirical model on both reductions and compare the results. The layoff risk for an individual worker is related to the following independent variables: age; married; children; type of work; apprentice; day labourer; transferred; length of service; and earnings. 53

The effects of some of the independent variables can, based on theoretical reasoning and qualitative evidence, be expected to have shifted over time. For example, this is the case with age and tenure, which should be negatively related to the risk of being laid off in April but not in October. The expectations for other variables, such as marital status and children, are less obvious.

To the extent that the male-breadwinner norm influenced the order of selection, being married should be associated with a higher layoff risk for female workers, but this criterion is not discussed in the qualitative sources. Furthermore, neither the qualitative evidence from the tobacco industry, nor the secondary literature on the labour market of the inter-war period, gives many clues about how young female workers with children were treated in layoff situations. If a general need-principle was applied, young mothers would be protected; having children would in that case be negatively associated with the layoff risk. It could also have been the case that more emphasis was put on the unsuitability of young mothers to participate in gainful employment. Having children would then be positively associated with the layoff risk.

Other criteria with unclear importance with regard to layoffs are the statuses of apprentices and day labourers. Apprentices traditionally had a certain degree of employment protection, 54 whereas day labourers were commonly regarded as temporary workers. However, the latter was not necessarily the case at Malmo Cigar Factory. 55 Most likely, day labourers were, in this particular context, moved around between various tasks. This may actually have decreased their risk of being laid off.

To the extent that there was a close connection between the elimination of jobs and the termination of employment contracts, type of work should have mattered a lot for the risk of being laid off. Given the nature of technological change, we would expect higher layoff risks for cigar workers than for preparation workers.

Finally, since remuneration was partly based on hours, the Tobacco Monopoly had incentives to retain high-performing workers rather than low-performing workers. Hence, earnings are expected to be negatively related to the layoff risk.

I proceed with the multivariate analysis by first commenting on the signs and statistical significance of various variables, and thereafter looking further into the magnitude of some effects. Table 2 summarizes the results of logistic regressions on the layoff risk in April and October 1921. Basically, the results confirm the established picture of the significance of age and tenure in April and the insignificance of the same criteria in October. The negative coefficients of age and tenure variables indicate that, in the group female workers under 25, older individuals with long tenures faced a lower risk of being laid off in April. For the October reduction, the coefficient for age is still negative, but statistically insignificant, whereas the coefficient for tenure is

Table 2. Explaining the layoff risk, female workers under 25 in April and October 1921.

| Variable        | April 1921     | October 1921   |
|-----------------|----------------|----------------|
| Age             | /C28 0.356 *** | /C28 0.065     |
|                 | (0.111)        | (0.101)        |
| Married         | 0.033          | /C28 0.423     |
|                 | (0.777)        | (0.613)        |
| Children        | /C28 0.435     | 0.172          |
|                 | (0.750)        | (0.547)        |
| Type of work    |                |                |
| Preparation     | reference      | reference      |
| Cigar           | 1.103 *        | /C28 0.151     |
|                 | (0.560)        | (0.539)        |
| Cigar-cigarette | 0.310          | /C28 0.554     |
|                 | (0.487)        | (0.393)        |
| Packing         | 0.053          | /C28 2.099 **  |
|                 | (0.608)        | (0.857)        |
| Other           | 0.812          | /C28 0.544     |
|                 | (0.756)        | (0.505)        |
| Apprentice      | /C28 0.969 **  | 0.316          |
|                 | (0.420)        | (0.474)        |
| Day labourer    | /C28 2.011 *** | /C28 0.862 *   |
|                 | (0.557)        | (0.495)        |
| Tenure          | /C28 2.123 *** | 0.105          |
|                 | (0.251)        | (0.134)        |
| Transferred     | /C28 2.997 *** | 0.246          |
|                 | (0.598)        | (0.487)        |
| Earnings 1920   | /C28 0.013 **  | /C28 0.020 *** |
|                 | (0.006)        | (0.006)        |
| Constant        | 13.633 ***     | 3.779 **       |
|                 | (1.973)        | (1.755)        |
| N               | 544            | 360            |
| Prob /C21 chi2  | 0.000          | 0.000          |
| Pseudo R 2      | 0.550          | 0.105          |

Notes: *** indicates statistical significance at 99% level, ** at 95% level, * at 90% level. Standard errors in parentheses.

positive and insignificant. A related difference between the two reductions concerns the effects of having been transferred from another factory, which reduced the layoff risk in April but not in October. Thus, it was length of service in the company, and not in a particular factory, that was of importance in April. This observation cannot be made from the qualitative sources.

An even more striking contribution of the logistic regression analysis is with regard to the importance of worker performance for the risk of being laid off. This variable was statistically significant both in April and in October, which indicates a certain degree of discretion in the layoff procedure. There was some scope for lowerlevel managers and/or foremen to select the workers to be retained and those to be released outside the official selection criteria. That this scope was used to protect high-performing workers, as shown by the negative sign, is not surprising from a theoretical perspective. Since most workers were not on pure piece rates, the company had strong incentives to retain the most productive individuals.

Being married and having children are two other criteria that were not explicitly talked about in the qualitative sources. Neither of these criteria appears to have been applied when establishing the order of selection among young female workers in 1921. After all, only a small portion of them were married or had children.

The statistical evidence of the close connection between job elimination and termination of employment contracts is ambiguous. As displayed in Table 2, cigar workers were more likely to be laid off than preparation workers in April, but not in October. This suggests that there were unrecorded transfers within the factory in 1921 and that the layoff risk was more related to personal characteristics than to the job title held at the beginning of the year. 56

A clear finding in the logistic regressions is that day labourers were not more likely to lose their jobs than other workers; rather the contrary. 57 The day labourers of Malmo Cigar Factory cannot be seen as a labour reserve. The finding that apprentices were protected from layoffs in April is less surprising and suggests that although there were no formal apprentice contracts at the Tobacco Monopoly, the old custom of protecting workers in training lingered on for a while.

Overall, it is obvious that the logistic regression analysis has much more to say about the selection criteria applied in April 1921 than in October the same year. This is in itself interesting since it reflects the difference in the layoff procedure between the two reductions. In April the management applied criteria which were easy to measure and implement: age and tenure. In October, the layoff criteria were vaguer and left middle-level managers with more room for discretion. As mentioned, the need principle includes many possible dimensions, some of which are hard to measure. Thus, the seniority principle made the layoff procedure more transparent not only for the affected workers at the time but for present-day researchers as well.

Now that the direction and statistical significance of various effects have been discussed, the next step is to look into the magnitude of the layoff risks experienced by individual workers in April and October. This is done by using the estimated coefficients to calculate predicted probabilities of being laid off for workers with given characteristics.

Figure 2 illustrates one of the most fundamental differences between the reductions in April and October /C1 how the layoff risk was affected by length of service. The predicted probabilities have been calculated for a female worker who at the time of the reduction was 20 years old, unmarried, without children, engaged in preparation work,

Figure 2. Probabilities of being laid off by tenure for female preparation workers under 25 in April and October 1921.

<!-- image -->

Note: See the text for assumptions regarding the workers' characteristics.

not transferred from another factory, not an apprentice or a day labourer and who earned 180 kronor per month during the preceding year. If this individual had been employed for six months, she would have faced a 95% riskof losing the job in April, but the risk rapidly decreased with tenure. Had she instead been employed for two and a half years, the layoff risk would have been around 20%, and had she been employed for four years or more, the risk would have approached zero. In October the relationship between the layoff risk and tenure was completely different. Workers with relatively long tenures did not face a lower layoff risk on this occasion.

Figure 3 illustrates the effect of worker earnings on the layoff risk, which was negative in both reductions. The example worker used to calculate the predicted probabilities is similar to the one used above, with the difference that she is assumed to have been employed for two and a half years. The predicted probabilities have been calculated for the range 140 to 220 kronor per month, which is equivalent to one standard deviation in each direction from the average for workers in April. As illustrated in Figure 3, the risk of losing the job for a 20-year-old female worker who earned 180 kronor in 1920 was about 24% in the April reduction. Had she showed greater effort the preceding year, and earned 220 kronor, the predicted probability would have been 16%. In relative terms the risk decreased by a third.

Figure 3. Probabilities of being laid off by earnings for female preparation workers under 25 in April and October 1921.

<!-- image -->

April October

Note: See the text for assumptions regarding the workers' characteristics.

Worker performance made an even greater difference in October. The difference in the predicted probability of earning 180 and 220 kronor for the worker in the example was almost halved, from 27% to 14%.

## Layoffs after 1921

With hindsight the Tobacco Monopoly's way of dealing with workforce reductions after 1921 appears to be somewhat rambling. 58 Different criteria were applied from case to case. However, length of service was never again used when establishing the order of selection. Instead the need principle in various forms became more important. Being a socially responsible employer meant that those who could not compete in the regular labour market, that is disabled and aged workers, were to be protected. For example, when giving about half of the remaining male cigar-makers notice of dismissal in January 1927, the management stated that it had given preferential treatment to disabled workers. 59 The move to release senior male workers was controversial and led to sharp protests from the union, which made the management revise its decision. A number of laid-off male workers were rehired and an equivalent number of women was released. In the negotiations a union delegate had argued that married women should be the first to go in personnel reductions. This was not the official standpoint of the union, but the idea, which was prominent in the contemporary political debate, seems to have influenced the management. 60 When female workers were laid off in the autumn 1927, married women, whose husbands were also employed at the company, were explicitly targeted.

## Conclusions

This article investigates layoff procedures and criteria at the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly in 1921. Although there were no formal rules governing the order of selection at the Tobacco Monopoly, qualitative evidence suggests that there was an implicit agreement that protected senior workers from unemployment. The validity of this agreement is confirmed by a statistical analysis of layoff risks at Malmo Cigar Factory in the spring of 1921. In accordance with the official statement made by the management, a logistic regression shows that the personnel reduction affected young and recently hired workers. When mass layoffs were carried through in October the same year, length of service was no longer considered when establishing the order of selection. The management did not explain why it abandoned the seniority principle, but its changed policy is not surprising from a theoretical perspective. Mechanization made skill transfers from senior to junior workers less important and senior workers were no longer needed in the training process. Moreover, the severity and extent of the depression decreased the bargaining power of the union.

The seniority principle was officially replaced by the need principle in October 1921. If, and how, the management actually applied this criterion in this early phase of downsizing remain unclear. The only pattern with regard to selection criteria in October 1921, which can be established in the quantitative analysis, is that highperforming workers were protected from layoffs. This tendency is detected for April as well, but is stronger for October.

The findings in this article have bearing on our understanding of the historical context as well as of layoffs in general. With regard to the labour market of inter-war

Sweden, it is already known that length of service was often mentioned as a layoff criterion in collective agreements. This article has shown that the seniority principle could also matter where it was not formally agreed upon. However, the implicit seniority norm was not written in stone and could be abandoned if conditions changed. If a state-owned enterprise with high expectations of its personnel policies, such as the Tobacco Monopoly, could ignore the seniority principle, many less scrupulous employers probably did the same thing. It is in this light we should understand unions' efforts to formalize layoff criteria.

In a more general sense, the evidence from the Tobacco Monopoly confirms the prevailing view that layoffs are seldom governed by pure principles, but rather by a mix of criteria related to efficiency and fairness. The article also illustrates the value of combining qualitative and quantitative evidence when studying layoffs. The researcher who only studies the involved actors' statements risks leaving out unspoken practices. Correspondingly, investigating layoff risks without knowledge of the context can lead to severe misunderstandings of the findings and a failure to explain the observed pattern. Indeed, this article has shown that it is of crucial importance to consider why layoffs are implemented in the first place, in order to explain how the order of selection is established.

## Acknowledgements

For their comments and suggestions I thank Christer Lundh, Maria Stanfors, Anders Nilsson, Klas Fregert, Susanna Fellman, Tommy Isidorsson, seminar participants at the Departments of Economic History in Lund and Gothenburg and two anonymous referees. For help with language corrections I thank Jaya Reddy. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to Malmo City Archives, the Labour Movement Archives and Library, and the Libraries in Stockholm and Swedish Match for giving me access to source material, and to the Crafoord Foundation for financial support.

## Notes

- 1. OECD, Employment Outlook (Paris: OECD, 2004), ch. 2.
- 2. Gayle J. Allard, Measuring Job Security over Time: In Search of a Historical Indicator for EPL (Employment Protection Legislation) (working paper WP05-17, Madrid: Instituto de Empresa, 2005).
- 3. The legislation is much debated and has been changed in some respects over time. See Per Skedinger, Effekter av anstallningsskydd: Vad sager forskningen? ¨ ¨ (Stockholm: SNS, 2008), 42.
- 4. Mats Glava ˚, Arbetsbrist och kravet pa ˚ saklig grund (Stockholm: Norstedts juridik, 1999); Berit Bengtsson, Kampen mot §23: Facklig makt vid anstallning och avsked i Sverige fore ¨ ¨ 1940 (Uppsala: Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, 2006).
- 5. For historical case study evidence of layoff criteria, see Barton Hamilton and Mary MacKinnon, 'Quits and Layoffs in Early Twentieth Century Labor Markets', Explorations in Economic History 33 (1996): 3. For more recent case study evidence, see Daniel Cornfield, 'Chances of Layoff in a Corporation: A Case Study', Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983): 4; and Marta Elvira and Christopher Zatzick, 'Who's Displaced First? The Role of Race in Layoff Decisions', Industrial Relations 41 (2002): 2.
- 6. Jon Elster, 'Layoffs as a Problem of Local Justice', in Layoffs and Local Justice , ed. F. Engelstad, ISF Report 94: 4 (Oslo: Institute for Social Research, 1994).
- 7. Frederick H. Harbison, 'Seniority in Mass-Production Industries', Journal of Political Economy 48 (1940): 6; Carl Gersuny, 'Employment Seniority: From Iago to Weber', Journal of Labor Research 3 (1982): 1; Katharine G. Abraham and James T. Medoff,

- 'Length of Service and Layoffs in Union and Non-union Work-groups', Industrial &amp; Labor Relations Review 38 (1984): 1; Sanford Jacoby, Employing Bureaucracy: Managers, Unions and the Transformation of Work in the 20th Century (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate Publishers, 2004 [1985]); Sangheon Lee, 'Seniority as an Employment Norm: The Case of Layoffs and Promotion in the US Employment Relationship', SocioEconomic Review 2 (2004): 1; Elster, 'Layoffs as a Problem of Local Justice'; Fredrik Engelstad, 'The Significance of Seniority in Layoffs: A Comparative Analysis', Social Justice Research 11 (1998): 2.
- 8. Glava ˚, Arbetsbrist och kravet pa ˚ saklig grund ; Bengtsson, Kampen mot § 23 , 115.
- 9. Arbetslo shetsutredningens betankande. 1, Arbetsloshetens omfattning, karaktar och orsaker ¨ ¨ ¨ (Stockholm: Nord. bokh. i distr., 1931), 388.
- 10. Bengtsson, Kampen mot § 23 .
- 11. Fredrik Engelstad, 'Needs and Social Justice: The Criterion of Needs when Exempting Employees from Layoffs', Social Justice Research 10 (1997): 2.
- 12. With regard to inter-war Sweden, unions organizing trade, construction, transport and food industry workers at some point managed to include stipulations about preferential job rights for their members. Bengtsson, Kampen mot § 23 , 116.
- 13. Bengtsson, Kampen mot § 23 , 111.
- 14. Rene 'e Frangeur, Yrkeskvinna eller makens tja narinna? Striden om yrkesra tten for gifta kvinnor i mellankrigstidens Sverige (Lund: Arkiv, 1998).
- 15. Beta nkande angaende gift kvinnas forvarvsarbete m.m ˚ ¨ ¨ . (Stockholm, 1938), 314.
- 16. Age is related to both the seniority principle and the need principle. Older workers tend to have spent more time with the same employer and faced greater difficulties if they lost their jobs.
- 17. For examples of this practice from the inter-war Swedish labour market, see Bengtsson, Kampen mot § 23 , 116.
- 18. Arbetslo shetsutredningens betankande. 1 ¨ , 376 /C1 7; Lars Harrysson, ' Disponent i brytningstid: En problematisering av AB Robertsfors Bruks lednings ambitioner och mojligheter vad avser utveckling av lonevillkor och sociala anordningar i Robertsfors aren 1925 ¨ ˚ /C1 35 , Meddelanden fran Socialho gskolan, vol. 1, 1997 (Lund: Lunds universitet, Socialhogskolan, 1997), 69, ˚ ¨ 92.
- 19. For an example, where no less than 12 criteria were applied, see Eva Blomberg, Ma n i mo rker: Arbetsgivare, reformister och syndikalister: Politik och identitet i svensk gruvindustri (Stockholm: Almqvist och Wiksell International, 1995), 234.
- 20. Elster, Layoffs as a Problem of Local Justice , 23.
- 21. Lee, 'Seniority as an Employment Norm', 75.
- 22. Arbetslo shetsutredningens betankande. 1 ¨ , 388; Bengtsson, Kampen mot § 23 , 111.
- 23. Harbison, 'Seniority in Mass-Production Industries'.
- 24. Gary Becker, 'Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis', Journal of Political Economy 70 (1962): 5; Donald Parsons, 'Specific Human Capital: An Application to Quit Rates and Layoff Rates', Journal of Political Economy 80 (1972): 6.
- 25. Lorne Carmichael, 'Does Rising Productivity Explain Seniority Rules for Layoffs?', American Economic Review 73 (1983): 5.
- 26. Edward Lazear, Personnel Economics for Managers (New York: Wiley, 1998), 170 /C1 3.
- 27. This issue has been discussed by labour historians inspired by Walter Korpi's power resources approach. C.f. Klas Amark, ˚ Facklig makt och fackligt medlemskap: De svenska fackforbundens medlemsutveckling 1890 ¨ /C1 1940 (Lund: Arkiv, 1986).
- 28. Peter B. Doeringer and Michael J. Piore, Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis (Lexington, MA: Heath, 1971), 17 /C1 22.
- 29. Lester Thurow, 'A Job Competition Model', in Unemployment and Inflation: Institutionalist and Structuralist Views , ed. Michael J. Piore (White Plains, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1979), 22 /C1 3; Patrica Reagan, 'On-the-Job Training, Layoff by Inverse Seniority, and the Incidence of Unemployment', Journal of Economics and Business 44 (1992): 4.
- 30. If not stated otherwise, this section is based upon the following literature: Tobias Karlsson, Downsizing: Personnel Reductions at the Swedish Tobacco Monopoly, 1915 /C1 1940 (Lund: Department of Economic History, Lund University, 2008), ch. 4; Minnesskrift med anledning av Svenska tobaksmonopolets tjugofema ˚riga verksamhet den 1 juni 1940,

1915 /C1 1940 (Stockholm: Svenska tobaksmonopolet, 1940); Om tobak i Sverige: Jubileumsskrift 1915 /C1 1965 (Stockholm: Svenska Tobaks Aktiebolaget, 1965).

- 31. The social responsibility was, among other things, manifested in a number of welfare schemes /C1 such as banking services, libraries, courses, child care, health insurance and old age pension /C1 introduced by the company. Karlsson, Downsizing , 64 /C1 8.
- 32. Tage Lindbom and Evert Kuhm, Tobaksarbetarnas forbund i Sverige 1889 /C1 1939 (Stockholm: Svenska tobaksindustriarbetarefo rbundet, 1940).
- 33. Karlsson, Downsizing , 184 /C1 8.
- 34. Arbetarro relsens arkiv och bibliotek (ARAB), Svenska tobaksindustriarbetareforbundets arkiv (STF), Inkomna skrivelser fra ˚n Tobaksmonopolet, E03: 1, November 29, 1920. All translations are mine; the original quotations in Swedish are found in Karlsson, Downsizing .
- 35. Karlsson, Downsizing , 68 /C1 72.
- 36. Om tobak i Sverige , 39.
- 37. Mark Pruz, 'Mechanisation and the Gender-Based Division of Labour in the US Cigar Industry', Cambridge Journal of Economics 14 (1990): 1, 73 /C1 4.
- 38. Arbetslo shetsutredningens betankande. 1, Bilagor, Bd 2 ¨ (Stockholm: Nord. bokh. i distr., 1931), 69.
- 39. Karlsson, Downsizing , 157.
- 40. Om tobak i Sverige , 70 /C1 5, 356.
- 41. Swedish Match (SM), Svenska tobaksmonopolets arkiv (STM), Styrelsens protokoll, March 14, 1921.
- 42. SM, STM, Styrelsens protokoll, April 18, 1921.
- 43. SM, STM, Styrelsens protokoll, September 26, 1921.
- 44. ARAB, STF, Styrelsens protokoll, A02: 4, September 24, 1921; ARAB, STF, Styrelsens protokoll, A02: 4, October 1, 1921.
- 45. ARAB, STF, Styrelsens protokoll, A02: 4, October 13, 1921.
- 46. ARAB, STF, Cirkula r, B03: 3, December 7, 1921.
- 47. ARAB, STF, Inkomna skrivelser fra ˚n Tobaksmonopolet, E03: 1, November 7, 1921.
- 48. SM, STM, Styrelsens protokoll, September 26, 1921; ARAB, STF, Inkomna skrivelser fran Tobaksmonopolet, E0: 1, September 30, 1921. ˚
- 49. ARAB, STF, Inkomna skrivelser fra ˚n Tobaksmonopolet, E03: 1, November 7, 1921.
- 50. MS, FHK, Matriklar o ver slutade arbetare, D4A: 1 /C1 8.
- 51. For similar applications of logistic regression analysis to layoffs, see Cornfield, 'Chances of Layoff in a Corporation', and Elvira and Zatzick, 'Who's Displaced First?'
- 52. The reason for focusing on this group is to limit the number of variables. Keeping the age group constant is also preferred since it facilitates comparisons between the reductions. It is not deemed meaningful to analyse the layoff risks for the old workers who were temporarily laid off in October, since these layoffs basically meant that all workers above a certain age (which was different for men and women) were released.
- 53. Definitions of the variables and descriptive statistics for the samples used in the logistic regressions are found in Appendix 1.
- 54. See MS, FHK, Arbetsoch loneavtal, F8F: 1, O fverenskommelse mellan Svenska cigarrfabrikantforeningen och Internationella tobaksarbetareforbundet i Sverige ¨ ¨ , 16.
- 55. The day labourers in the Tobacco Monopoly's service were included in the company's pension schemes and were eligible for redundancy compensation. Furthermore, day labourers were laid off 'due to shortage of work' in the personnel records of Malmo Cigar Factory, which was not the case with workers hired on temporary terms. For a more indepth discussion, see Karlsson, Downsizing , 161 /C1 3.
- 56. The issue of transfers is also frequently discussed in the qualitative sources.
- 57. This finding is not caused by the assumption that day labourers were preparation workers. Separate regressions have been run on preparation workers only, but the significant negative effect of being a day labourer remains.
- 58. Karlsson, Downsizing , 192 /C1 8, 209 /C1 12.
- 59. ARAB, STF, Inkomna skrivelser fra ˚n Tobaksmonopolet, E03: 2, January 27, 1927.
- 60. ARAB, STF, Styrelsens protokoll, A02: 5, March 2 /C1 3, 1927.

## Appendix A

Table A1. Definition of variables and descriptive statistics for the samples used in the logistic regressions.

|                 |                                                                           | April 1921   | April 1921   | October 1921   | October 1921   |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|--------------|----------------|----------------|
| Variable        | Definition                                                                | N            | Mean         | N              | Mean           |
| Age             | Continuous variable measured in years                                     | 579          | 19.76        | 386            | 20.54          |
| Married         | Dummy variable (1 /C30 worker is married)                                 | 579          | 6%           | 386            | 8%             |
| Children        | Dummy variable (1 /C30 worker has at least one child under 15)            | 579          | 7%           | 386            | 8%             |
| Type of work    | Categorical variable                                                      |              |              |                |                |
| Preparation     | Preparation work                                                          | 574          | 36%          | 380            | 35%            |
| Cigar           | Manufacturing of cigars                                                   | 574          | 13%          | 380            | 11%            |
| Cigar-cigarette | Manufacturing of cigar-cigarettes                                         | 574          | 32%          | 380            | 33%            |
| Packing         | Sorting and packing of finished goods                                     | 574          | 10%          | 380            | 10%            |
| Other           | Machine work, manufacturing of cigarettes, work outside direct production | 574          | 9%           | 380            | 11%            |
| Apprentice      | Dummy variable (1 /C30 apprentice)                                        | 579          | 26%          | 386            | 18%            |
| Day labourer    | Dummy variable (1 /C30 day labourer)                                      | 579          | 14%          | 386            | 12%            |
| Transferred     | Dummy variable (1 /C30 worker has been transferred from other factory)    | 579          | 10%          | 386            | 13%            |
| Tenure          | Continuous variable measured in years of service at the factory           | 579          | 3.08         | 386            | 4.12           |
| Earnings 1920   | Continuous variable measuring average monthly earnings in Swedish kronor  | 547          | 182.49       | 364            | 194.56         |
| Laid off        | Dummy variable (1 /C30 laid off due to shortage of work)                  | 579          | 26%          | 386            | 20%            |

Notes: I use the earnings of the preceding year since hours-reductions during 1921 may have affected the earnings of various worker categories differently. Day labourers are assumed to be employed in preparation work, if the personnel records did not state that the worker in question had another occupation. For more details on how the variables have been constructed, see Karlsson, Downsizing , 203 /C1 4. The descriptive statistics refer to female workers under 25 at Malmo Cigar Factory on 5 April and ¨ 4 October 1921 respectively.

Source: MS, FHK, Matriklar o ver slutade arbetare, D4A: 1 /C1 8.