## Employment and Technological Change in Philippine Agriculture

Randolph BARKER, William H. MEYERS, Cristina M. CRISOSTOMO and Bart DUFF 1

PHILIPPINE POPULATION GROWTH over the past two decades has been slightly higher than 3 per cent per year. Agriculture's share of the total labour force has been dechning gradually, although the number of persons in the agricultural labour force continues to increase.  A 2 rapidly expanding labour force, coupled with limited growth in nonfarm employment opportunities, means that the agricultural sector will remain the residual claimant of increments to the labour force for a good many years. The productivity of these additions to the agricultural labour force is important in planning agricultural development.

Until a decade ago land was in surplus in the Philippines.  Agri3 cultural production grew principally through the expansion of traditional inputs, land and labour. The closing of the land frontier about 1960 brought about a major shift in resource use in PhiUppine agriculture. 4

- 2 See, for example, G. L. Hicks and G. McNicoll: Trade and growth in the Philippines (Ithaca (New York), Cornell University Press, 1971). Hicks and McNicoll and other writers on the Philippine economy emphasise the capital-intensive bias in the growth of the nonagricultural sector. From 1950 to 1968, non-farm employment has grown at 4.2 per cent per annum while agricultural employment has grown at only 2.9 per cent per annum. Thus the share of labour employed in agriculture has declined slowly. It was about 62 per cent in 1950, 60 per cent in 1960, and 56 per cent in 1965-68.
- 3 See R. W. Hooley: " Long-term growth of the Philippine economy, 1902-1961 ", in Philippine Economic Journal, Vol. 7, No. 1, First Semester, 1968, pp. 1-24.
- * Post-war trends in resource use and productivity in Philippine agriculture are analysed in C. M. Crisostomo: " Sources of output growth in Philippine agriculture, 1948-1968 ", unpublished MA thesis, University of the Philippines, 1972.

Of necessity, growth in agricultural production now depends on measures which increase the productivity of the existing land base. The introduction of high-yielding varieties of rice is one step in the modernisation of agriculture. It represents a shift away from a nearly exclusive reliance on traditional factors of production.

Questions are being raised about the likely impact on employment of the introduction of high-yielding varieties. Many observers are also concerned that mechanisation will tend to be unduly labour-displacing, thus aggravating the problem of underemployment or unemployment. 1 At the focal point of the agricultural employment issue are the role of mechanisation and the relationship between the diffusion of new rice varieties and the adoption of mechanical technology.

This article examines recent trends in mechanisation and employment in Philippine agriculture with emphasis on the rice sector. Our objectives are to establish the direction and magnitude of trends in mechanisation and employment; to identify the relationships between the seed-fertiliser technology, mechanisation and employment; and to examine current government policies that affect mechanisation and determine the degree to which they encourage labour displacement without significant productivity gains.

The article is divided into four parts. The first section describes recent patterns of technological change with emphasis on the highyielding varieties programme, and on mechanisation in rice. Factors that have influenced the rate of mechanisation are discussed in the second section. The third section is concerned with the effect óf changes in technology and mechanisation on employment. The final section deals with policy issues related to mechanisation and employment, and research strategies related to the design of machinery and equipment.

## Patterns of technological change

Before 1960 the export sector of Philippine agriculture appears to have been ahead of the food grain sector in terms of modernisation and land productivity growth. However, the pattern of modernisation among the major export crops-coconuts, sugar cane and timberhas been far from uniform.

The growth rate in coconut production from 1911 to the mid1960s was about 5 per cent per annum.  The growth was accounted for 2 almost entirely by expansion in the use of traditional inputs-land

and labour. During this same period yield increased by less than 1 per cent per annum, and much of this gain can be explained by the shift in geographical distribution of trees from Luzon to the higher-yielding regions of Mindanao. 1

Sugar cane experienced rapid growth in yield per hectare as early as the 1920s when high-yielding varieties were introduced from Java. Although cane has accounted for only about 5 per cent of the nation's cultivated land area, this crop has been the largest user of modem farm inputs such as fertilisers and tractors. However, McHale points out that the introduction of the sugar quota system in the 1930s seems to have retarded the necessary research and development to ensure sustained growth in yield per hectare.  Since the early 1960s, yield per hectare 2 of cane has dropped to pre-Second World War levels and the area planted to sugar cane has expanded to meet increased demand from domestic and overseas markets.

Logging does not fall within the general framework of our discussion of mechanisation in Philippine agriculture. It is worth noting, however, that logging is more highly capitalised than other agricultural activities and between 1955 and 1965 log exports grew at the rate of 11.5 per cent a year. As practised in the Philippines, logging is largely an extractive industry, and this rapid growth rate can hardly be expected to continue in the future.

Table I shows the shift in yield growth rates that has occurred during the post-war period. Clearly food grains (rice and corn), and not export crops (sugar and coconuts), have been major contributors to the growth in land productivity since 1960. During this period rice and corn together accounted for approximately 65 per cent of the nation's effective crop area. The high rate of growth in corn output is partly a result of the growing demand for corn as a livestock feed.

## Modernisation of the rice sector

There are two reasons for emphasising rice. First, it is the most important crop in the Philippines in terms of area and employment. There are about 3.2 million crop hectares (40 per cent of the total effective crop area) producing rice, and over a million rice farmers. Second, the advent of the so-called Green Revolution has focused attention

## International Labour Review

## (percentages)

TABLE I.   RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION OF AREA AND YIELD TO TOTAL GROWTH IN PRODUCTION OF FOUR MAJOR PHILIPPINE AGRICULTURAL CROPS IN TWO TIME PERIODS

|          | 1948/50-1958/60           | 1948/50-1958/60                    | 1948/50-1958/60                    | 1958/60-1967/69   | 1958/60-1967/69                    | 1958/60-1967/69                    |
|----------|---------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Crop     | Annual  growth in  output | Change in output  due to change in | Change in output  due to change in | Annual  growth in | Change in output  due to change in | Change in output  due to change in |
|          | Annual  growth in  output | Area                               | Yield                              | output            | Area                               | Yield                              |
| Rice     | 3.7                       | 115                                | -15                                | 2.3               | -3                                 | 103                                |
| Com      | 6.4                       | 114                                | -14                                | 5.4               | 49                                 | 51                                 |
| Sugar    | 9.3                       | 86                                 | 14                                 | 2.2               | 140                                | -40                                |
| Coconuts | 3.6                       | 13                                 | 87                                 | 3.6               | 180                                | -80                                |

Source of basic data: Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Government of the Philippines.

on mechanisation and employment in the rice sector. Thus our findings with respect to rice in the Phihppines will be of considerable interest to other Asian countries.

Gains in total rice output per hectare result from a combination of increases in the number of hectares double-cropped and increases in the yield per hectare per crop. Before the introduction of the highyielding varieties in 1967, irrigation development permitting expansion of the double-cropped area was a key factor in increasing land productivity. The irrigated rice crop area showed little increase in the 1950s, but rose from 24 per cent in 1959 to 45 per cent in 1969-71 (table II).

Irrigation in the Philippines is dominated by large gravity flow systems. A typical system consists of a dam, constructed to divert river water through main canals, and laterals leading to the rice-growing area where it flows from one farmer's field to the next. Many observers feel that improvements in the existing irrigation system at the farm level would have a high pay-off. Takahashi 1 , for example, writing about one Central Luzon village, notes that there was almost complete anarchy in the distribution of water. Maintenance of ditches was poor. People opened and shut water-gates " without regard to the conditions of plants in other cultivators' fields ".

Partly as a result of the conditions described above, there has been a growing interest in the use of small 4-inch to 6-inch irrigation pumps to lift water from streams or wells. Before 1965 there were few

TABLE II.   PRODUCTION, AREA AND YIELD OF ROUGH RICE, AND PERCENTAGE OF CROP AREA IRRIGATED, IN THE PHILIPPINES, 1948/50-1969/71

| Three-year   | Production  ('000 mt)   | Crop  area   | Cultivated  area   | Yield  mt/ha   | Crop area  irrigated (%)   |
|--------------|-------------------------|--------------|--------------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| Three-year   | Production  ('000 mt)   | ('000 ha)    | ('000 ha)          | Yield  mt/ha   | Crop area  irrigated (%)   |
| 1948/50      | 2 446                   | 2 135        | 1900               | 1.15           | 19 !                       |
| 1951/53      | 2 864                   | 2 458        | 2 268              | 1.17           |                            |
| 1954/56      | 3 220                   | 2 681        | 2 435              | 1.20           | 22 *                       |
| 1957/59      | 3411                    | 3 083        | 2 748              | 1.11           | 24  3                      |
| 1960/62      | 3 785                   | 3 228        | 2 757              | 1.17           | 28                         |
| 1963/65      | 3 934                   | 3 150        | 2 675              | 1.25           | 31                         |
| 1966/68      | 4 242                   | 3 170        |                    | 1.34           | 38                         |
| 1969/71      | 4968                    | 3 186        |                    | 1.56           | 45                         |

1948 only.

1956 only.

' 1959 only.

Source of basic data: Bureau of Agricultural Economics,  Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Government of the Philippines.

irrigation pumps in the Philippines. From 1965 to 1971 nearly 8,000 pumps were imported by the Government under the Japanese Reparations Agreement and sold to farmers by its Irrigation Service Unit (ISU). The ISU estimates that 208,000 hectares are irrigated by these pumps \ but Robertson 2  indicates that the estimate is unrealistically high. 3 About 2,000 additional pumps were sold through other government and private channels during the same period.

Rice farms in the Philippines are typically small with an average size of about 2 to 3 hectares. According to the 1960 census, 37 per cent of the farms are fully owned by the occupier, 16 per cent are partially owned, 46 per cent are operated by tenants, and the remaining 1 per cent are under other forms of management. While operating units are small, there are some land holdings of several hundred hectares (and in a few cases of a thousand or more hectares). A Land Reform Bill, passed in 1964, prescribed the conditions for the transfer of land from owners to tenants in two stages: share tenant to leasee (cash rent), and leasee to full owner. Implementation of the Land Reform Law has

- 8 The discrepancy appears to be the result of the method used to rate the capacity of the pump. The ISU uses a procedure based on theoretical discharge given the pump size and pumping lift. Robertson's estimates, derived from sample surveys of irrigation pumps in the Nueva Ecija area, show that in actual performance the 4-inch and 5-inch pumps are well below ISU capacity ratings.

been slow. Only a few farmers in certain designated land reform areas have made the first stage change from share tenure to leasehold.

The introduction of the high-yielding rice varieties diverted attention from land reform to productivity. In August 1966, 50 tons of IR8 seed were released by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) to the Philippine Government. This seed was multiplied on farmers' fields, and one year later, in the 1967 wet season, the first major planting of IR8 took place. The dissemination of the high-yielding varieties is well-documented by the results of annual surveys conducted by the Philippine Bureau of Agricultural Economics. The spread has been more extensive in the irrigated than in the rain-fed lowland areas. By 1970-71, 67 per cent of the irrigated areas were planted to the high-yielding varieties as opposed to 45 per cent of the rain-fed lowland areas.

The diffusion pattern of the high-yielding varieties and related inputs was studied 1 in the municipality of Gapan, which is located in Nueva Ecija, the largest of the rice-growing provinces in Central Luzon.

Five hundred and thirteen farms were surveyed in the wet season from 1965 to 1970. It was found that yield gains were not large in relation to the level of fertUiser applied and the use of other inputs (figure 1). The number of insecticide users has increased rapidly even among the rain-fed (lowland) farmers, who apparently have found the variety IR5 to be particularly well-suited to their conditions. Compared with other inputs, the increase in the number of people using tractors in the wet season has been very modest.

## Growth in mechanical technology

It is difficult to obtain national data on the introduction of mechanical technologies and even more difficult to determine in which part of the agricultural sector the machinery is being used. The national figures refer almost entirely to tractors, so we have supplemented them with farm survey information from the rice sector to provide a more adequate impression of some of the changes taking place.

The initial introduction of tractors seems to have been heavily concentrated in the sugar industry. The 1960 census reported that 35 per cent of the more than 5,000 four-wheel tractors owned were located in the Western Visayas and Pampanga Province in Luzon. These are the major sugar-growing areas. In 1960 the Philippines had only 176,000 hectares planted to sugar cane. There was a rise in four-wheel tractor sales between 1962 and 1964. This appears to have been related to the boom in the sugar industry resulting from the higher price obtained for Philippine sugar exports after the United States embargoed Cuban imports.

Figure 1.  Proportion of area planted to high-yielding varieties, and yield and input use for all varieties, by land type for the wet season, Gapan, Nueva Ecija (1965-70)

<!-- image -->

## International Labour Review

During the late 1960s there was a shift in tractor mechanisation towards rice, largely because the Government adopted a credit programme to encourage mechanisation. Uichanco 1  constructed a profile of a sample of four-wheel tractor purchasers in 1967. Forty-one per cent of the buyers grew rice only, while 38 per cent were engaged in the production of rice in combination with some other crops. Fifty-one per cent of the buyers owned farms of more than 50 hectares, but these included only 34 per cent of those who grew just rice. Sixty-four per cent of the buyers rented their tractors for custom work, while 83 per cent of those who grew rice only used their tractors for this purpose. Eighty-three per cent of tractor usage is for land preparation. It is clear that the fourwheel tractors are purchased by the big landowners and that, in the case of rice, these landowners make a business of renting tractors to small private owners and tenant farmers. Our farm surveys indicate that less than 10 per cent of the farmers that use tractors possess their own machines.

Power tillers or hand tractors   were first introduced in 1960, and 2 are used almost exclusively for preparing rice land. Data on national sales indicate that about 1,500 power tillers were sold between 1960 and 1965 and more than 8,000 units were sold between 1966 and 1969. Two studies of hand tractors in Laguna Province show that the majority of tractors were owned by tenant farmers operating about 4.5 hectares of double-cropped rice land.  About 40 per cent of tractor hours were 3 spent on custom work, but the hours of tractor use appear to have declined from a high of 500 in 1964-65 to fewer than 350 in 1968-69 as more tractors became available.

The Gapan survey   provides information on the number of tractor 4 users by farm size and by tenure category. A chi square test indicated that size and tenure were independent factors. On both irrigated and rain-fed farms, yields were higher on smaller farms, while there was a tendency for tractor use to be higher on the large farms (figure 2). The only clear pattern about tenure that emerges is that owner-operated and share-tenant farms tend to have a higher percentage of tractor users. It should be noted that tenure status was determined as of 1970. The majority of the farms defined as leasehold (cash rent) in 1970 were

- 1 E. A. Uichanco: " Farm equipment marketing in the Philippines ", paper presented at the Philippine Society of Agricultural Engineers Convention, Los Baæos, Philippines, 11-12 December 1970.
- 2 The terms power tiller and hand tractor are usually not clearly defined in the literature and are used interchangeably here to mean any of the small hand tractors which range from about 6 to 15 horsepower.
- 3 N. G. Alviar: " A study of tractor and carabao cultivated farms in Laguna ", paper presented at the Seminar on Economics of Rice Production in the Philippines, International Rice Research Institute, 11-13 December 1969; N. L. Orcino: " Economic aspects of hand tractor ownership and operation ", Department of Agricultural Engineering, IRRI, Sep. 1970.
- 4 Barker, Dozina and Lin, op. cit.

Figure 2.  Percentage of tractor users for irrigated and rain-fed areas by farm size and tenure with corresponding yields per hectare, wet season, Gapan, Nueva Ecija (1965-70)

<!-- image -->

share-tenant farms in 1965, and were in the process of shifting to leasehold between 1965 and 1968.

One piece of equipment that has grown in popularity in recent years is the Japanese rotary weeder.  Here again, the pattern of adoption 1 varies widely from one locality to another. Mechanical weeders are not common in Gapan. One reason is that their use requires straightrow planting. In 1970 only 5 per cent of the farmers there were engaging in this practice and the number had declined from the previous year. Most of the transplanting crews who came from neighbouring municipalities were not experienced in this type of planting and, furthermore, farmers were reluctant to pay the considerably higher wage rates due for it. About half of the farmers practising straight-row planting in Gapan were located in one of the ten villages surveyed. This concentration of the practice is partly due to the fact that a special extension programme had been conducted there by the Philippine Rural Reconstruction Movement.

Surveys elsewhere in Central Luzon and Laguna show that the use of mechanical weeders rose rapidly between 1966 and 1970. In a Central Luzon-Laguna survey of 76 farms, users increased from 9 to 17 per cent, and in a survey of 153 farmers in Laguna Province users increased from 42 to 84 per cent. A detailed breakdown of weeding practices on these farms is given in table III. In 1970 the majority of farmers in the Central Luzon-Laguna survey preferred hand weeding or a combination of chemicals and hand weeding, while in the Laguna survey farmers preferred to use a combination of chemicals, mechanical weeding and hand weeding. The data are not typical of the Philippines, however. Laguna is one of the best rice-fanning areas of the country and the survey area in Central Luzon, being along the main highway, is more progressive than most areas of the region.

Tractor use for rice production appears to be concentrated in Luzon and mechanical threshing is even more narrowly concentrated in Central Luzon. Large stationary-type threshers powered by fourwheel and crawler tractors have been used in Central Luzon since before the Second World War. They normally operate only in the dry part of the year, when the harvested grain can be left to dry in stacks and the heavy machines can be easily moved across the rice fields. The threshers are manufactured locally. Evidence from the Gapan survey shows that, in 1970, 73 per cent of the threshers operating had been introduced between 1936 and 1960. As for the four-wheel tractor, it is the large landowners who own the threshers and rent services to tenants

(percentages)

TABLE III.   METHODS OF WEEDING USED BY 153 FARMERS IN THE LAGUNA SURVEY AND BY 76 FARMERS IN THE CENTRAL LUZON-LAGUNA SURVEYS, 1966 AND 1970 WET SEASONS

|                                        | Fanners   | Fanners   | Fanners   | Fanners               |
|----------------------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------------------|
| Method of weed control                 | Laguna    | Laguna    |           | Central  Luzon-Laguna |
|                                        | 1966      | 1970      | 1966      | 1970                  |
| Chemical only                          | 25        | 0         | 4         | 3                     |
| Hand only                              | 8         | 1         | 53        | 37                    |
| Rotary weeder only                     | 6         | 1         | 4         | 0                     |
| Chemical plus hand                     | 25        | 15        | 9         | 28                    |
| Chemical plus rotary weeder            | 22        | 11        | 0         | 1                     |
| Rotary weeder plus hand                | 1         | 3         | 1         | 7                     |
| Chemical plus hand plus rotary  weeder | 13        | 69        | 4         | 9                     |
| No weeding                             | 0         | 0         | 25        | 16                    |
| Users of rotary weeder                 | 42        | 84        | 9         | 17                    |

Source: Unpublished data from surveys conducted in the Central Luzon region and Laguna Province. See appendix for a detailed description of the location, timing and contents of each survey.

and small owner-operators. Elsewhere in the Philippines, nearly all rice is threshed by hand.

## Factors influencing the rate of mechanisation

A wide range of economic and non-economic factors affect the growth and use patterns of mechanisation in the Philippines and other Asian countries. Over time economic profitabihty should dictate the level of mechanisation. But profitability is influenced by the technologies available to the farmer at any given time and by the factor and product prices he faces. The shift in the production function as a result of the introduction of the high-yielding varieties and concurrent changes in farm practices may alter the marginal productivity of an existing piece of machinery or they may stimulate the design of new and more efficient machinery. What was once unprofitable under an old system of growing rice may become profitable under a new production function. At the same time government policies which alter the factor and product prices confronting a farmer may intentionally or unintentionally affect the rate of mechanisation.

## International Labour Review

## The economic advantage of mechanisation

Mechanisation becomes profitable when it lowers the cost of producing a commodity. Cost reductions can be achieved either by expanding output with no change in inputs or by producing a given output with a lower level of inputs. In agriculture the former increases the productivity of land and of labour as well. The latter normally increases labour productivity by substituting capital for labour.

The economic advantage of mechanisation differs from crop to crop. Among the major agricultural crops in the Philippines sugar cane is at present the most highly mechanised. The use of four-wheel tractors over a large area gives rise to economies of scale which have made it profitable to substitute capital for labour even at relatively low wage rates. The institutional structure of the sugar cane industry further faciHtates mechanisation. In the major sugar cane producing areas of the Visayas, farms (sometimes called sugar plantations) are large, averaging about 50 hectares in size. Landowners also have ready access to credit at reasonable rates through the sugar co-operatives. In these circumstances it is hardly surprising to find the major elements of labour unrest in agriculture centred in the sugar industry.

Mechanisation does not offer the same economic advantage in rice that it does in upland crops such as sugar cane. First, there are some technical difficulties involved in the mechanisation of certain tasks in rice production. Tractors do not operate efficiently in deep mud. They often can be used only for ploughing and water buffaloes must do the harrowing. Second, the institutional and social structure of Philippine rice farming is not conducive to certain types of mechanisation. Farm operating units are small and the arrangement for the sharing of costs between tenant and landlord (particularly land preparation where the tenant pays the entire cost) often makes ownership of currently available machinery an uncertain and unattractive investment.

Farmers in a survey in Laguna Province were asked to give their reasons for buying a hand tractor.  Ninety of the 150 respondents indi1 cated that they were concerned about the problems of keeping a water buffalo. Water buffaloes are frequently stolen or poisoned, and their care and feeding are a nuisance. The first issue, relating to theft, is a social issue, not an economic one. But the fact that farmers are concerned about the nuisance value of caring for the animal indicates that they are putting a high reservation price on their own labour or that they can afford the luxury of not owning a water buffalo. A somewhat smaller number of respondents (66) gave more direct economic reasons for

the purchase of a tractor : it saves time in land preparation, it can work faster, it is easier and cheaper to operate, and it can work continuously.

These responses suggest that mechanisation might increase land productivity by allowing the farmer either to prepare his land more thoroughly or more quickly and thus reducing the time interval between crops. The last factor is particularly important in areas where water is not available throughout the year (which is common) or where farmers are growing more than two rice crops a year (which is rare in the Philippines at present). Experimental results show that when the same number of horsepower-hours are used for land preparation with tractors or water buffaloes, the resulting yields are not significantly different.  How1 ever, it is possible that on some larger farming units the introduction of tractors may result in a higher horsepower input per hectare.

## The effect of government policies and programmes

The Central Bank of the Philippines (CB) has negotiated two loans with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) to promote farm mechanisation. The first CB-IBRD loan for US$5 million covered the period from 1 April 1966 to 31 May 1968. The second, for US$12.5 million, was initiated on 1 September 1969 and will expire on 31 March 1973. Both programmes have been administered through the rural banking system and were designed specifically to encourage mechanisation on small farms. Small farms were defined as operational units of not less than 5 hectares or more than 50 hectares in size. Fiftynine per cent of the first CB-IBRD loan was concentrated in the ricegrowing areas of Luzon.

The initial programme resulted in a rapid expansion of sales of both power tillers and four-wheel tractors (figure 3). However, 66 per cent of the loan funds were used for the purchase of four-wheel tractors and only 22 per cent for the purchase of power tillers, since the former are much more expensive. When funds from the first credit line were exhausted, power tiller sales fell sharply.

The second CB-IBRD loan started a few months before the peso exchange rate was allowed to float. When the floating rate was adopted in February 1970, local peso counterpart funds for financing became difficult to obtain and the rise in machinery prices discouraged purchases. In addition, financial requirements for obtaining loans through the second CB-IBRD programme were stricter. The result has been that during the first half of the second loan period of three-and-a-half years only a small part of the US$12.5 million was used. The bias towards

Figure 3. Annual sales of power units and number of mechanisation loans released under the CB-IBRD credit programme, 1966-70.A = First CB-IBRD credit line, April 1966; B = Second CB-IBRD credit line, September 1969; C = Floating exchange rate, February 1970.

<!-- image -->

Sources: Sales data from the Agricultural Machinery Dealers Association, Manila; CB-IBRD data from the Department of Rural Banks, Central Bank of the Philippines.

four-wheel tractor purchases was even more pronounced than und&lt;r the initial loan. Sixty-eight per cent of the total funds released were used for the purchase of four-wheel tractors and only 7 per cent for the purchase of power tillers.

The influence of factor price relationships on the role of mechanisation can be seen clearly by comparing mechanisation activities in the Philippines with those on the island of Taiwan and in Thailand in the mid 1960s (table IV). In the first case the ratio of price per horsepower of mechanical power to daily farm wages is 108 1 and the horsepower per

1

TABLE IV.   SELECTED INDICATORS OF FACTOR USE AND FACTOR PRICES IN THE PHILIPPINES, IN THAILAND, ON THE ISLAND OF TAIWAN AND IN JAPAN IN THE MID-1960S

|                                         | Philippines   | Thailand   | Taiwan   | Japan      |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------|------------|----------|------------|
| Cultivated land area ('000 ha)          | 6 042         | 11267      | 890      | 5 996      |
| Agricultural employment ('000)          | 5 824         | 10 200     | 1867     | 15 238     |
| Number of draft animals ('000)          | 2 052         | 5 174      | 360      | 1782       |
| Mechanical horsepower available 278 900 |               | 605 200    | 130 253  | 15 997 300 |
| Power tillers                           | 12 560        | 5 200      | 110103   | 15 516 910 |
| Tractors                                | 266 340       | 600 000    | 20150    | 480 390    |
| Price of mechanical power (S/hp)        | 129           | 67         | 112      | 68         |
| Power tillers                           | 154           | 133        | 112      | 68         |
| Tractors                                | 128           | 66         |          | .          |
| Farm wages (S/day)                      | 0.88 !        | 0.53       | 1.04     | 2.60       |
| Factor price ratio 3                    | 147           | 126        | 108      | 26         |
| Horsepower per agricultural  worker     | 0.048         | 0.059      | 0.070    | 1.05       |

1 Since meals were given together with money wages, money wages reported for the Philippines and for Japan were raised by 33 per cent and by 10 per cent respectively.

## Sources :

(1) Philippines data refer to 1967.

Cultivated land area and agricultural employment estimated by Crisostomb, op. cit. Basic data from Census of Agriculture, 1948 and 1960, by the Bureau of Census and Statistics, and Philippine Statistical Survey of Households by the National Economic Council.

Number of draft animals : APO Expert Group Meeting in Agricultural Mechanization, APO Project SYP/III/67 (Tokyo, Oct. 1968), Vol. II.

Mechanical horsepower available : Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Government of the Philippines.

Prices of mechanical power: Tillers from N. Alviar: "An economic comparison between tractor-operated and carabao-operated rice farms " (unpublished MS thesis. University of the Philippines, 1969). Four-wheel tractors from the Department of Economic Research, Central Bank of the Philippines.

Farm wages : Basic data from the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Government of the Philippines.

(2) Thailand data refer to 1963-64, while data for the island of Taiwan and Japan refer to 1965-66. Source of data was the APO Expert Group Meeting in Agricultural Mechanization, op. cit.

agricultural worker is 0.07. For the Philippines the higher power cost and lower farm wages result in a price ratio of 147, and this is reflected in a lower horsepower per agricultural worker of 0.048. Although the farm wages rate in Thailand is even lower than in the Philippines, the average price of mechanical power is also lower, so that both the factor price ratio (126) and the horsepower per agricultural worker (0.059) fall between the Taiwanese figures and those of the Philippines. Small farm size seems to have favoured the use of two-wheel power tillers on the island of Taiwan and in Japan. On the other hand, the rapid growth

Figure 4. Price indices of tractors, durable equipment, work animals and agricultural labour

<!-- image -->

A = Floating exchange rate, February 1970; B = End of progressive devaluation, 1959-65; C = Changes Minimum Wage Law. in

Source; Based on o f ta from Crisostomo, op. cit.

in the number of four-wheel tractors in Thailand (17,500 in 1968) 1 has been encouraged by a price bias favouring large tractors over power tillers.

The price indices for durable equipment, tractors, work animals, and farm labour in the Philippines have been plotted in figure 4. It is apparent that government policies with respect to the price of foreign exchange and wages have been important determinants of changes in the price of machinery and farm wages. As a result of a gradual devaluation of the peso (from P.2=US$1 to P.4=US$1), which had its greatest

effect between 1959 and 1962, the price of machinery rose rapidly and imports of tractors declined. Between 1963 and 1969 the cost of work animals and farm wages tended to increase somewhat more rapidly than the price of machinery and durable goods. It was during this period that the minimum wage was increased and the first CB-IBRD loan programme began. The adoption of the floating rate in 1970 (approximately P.6.4=US$1) again resulted in a sharp rise in the price of imported durable goods. But the cost of work animals and farm wages also rose simultaneously because of inflationary pressures and another increase in the minimum wage.

In summary a combination of forces was at work to encourage or discourage mechanisation or more specifically tractor use in the PhiUppines from 1960 onwards. During the first years of the decade mechanisation was discouraged by the devaluation of the peso. But the change in the world sugar situation brought a boom to the Philippine sugar industry, and tractor sales between 1962 and 1964 were relatively high. The initiation of the first CB-IBRD loan in 1966, followed by the introduction of the high-yielding rice varieties, shifted the emphasis in mechanisation to rice. But the adoption of the floating exchange rate in 1970 resulted in a sharp decline in tractor imports that year despite the enactment of a second CB-IBRD loan agreement. 1

Although mechanisation has increased rapidly in some parts of Luzon, it should be emphasised that tractors are used only on a small portion of Philippine farms. Approximately 10,000 four-wheel tractors and 10,000 power tillers service not more than 1.5 million hectares which include nearly all the land in sugar cane and perhaps 25 to 30 per cent of the land in rice. On many of the farms employing tractors, animal power is still used for some tasks.

## Employment implications

From 1966 to 1970, while the area planted to high-yielding varieties and the percentage of farms using mechanical technology was increasing, the total labour input increased slightly for the farms in the Central Luzon-Laguna survey area (table V).  For the farms in the Laguna 2 survey, where both labour input and wages are higher, the average labour input declined over the period. In both areas hired labour increased absolutely and as a proportion of total labour.

## International Labour Review

TABLE V. CHANGES IN TOTAL AND HIRED LABOUR USE PATTERNS IN THE WET SEASON AND CONCURRENT CHANGES IN TECHNOLOGY BETWEEN 1966 AND 1970 IN SELECTED AREAS OF THE PHILIPPINES WITH HIGH RATES OF MECHANISATION

|                           | Labour use   | Labour use   | Labour use    | Labour use   | Labour use   | Labour use       |
|---------------------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|--------------|--------------|------------------|
|                           | 1966         | 1966         | 1966          | 1970         | 1970         | 1970             |
| Survey area               | Man-days/ha  | Man-days/ha  | Per-  centage | Man-days/ha  | Man-days/ha  | Per-             |
|                           | Total        | Hired        | hired         | Total        | Hired        | - centage  hired |
| Central Luzon-Laguna      |              |              |               |              |              |                  |
| Land preparation          | 17           | 3            | 18            | 10           | 2            | 23               |
| Pulling and transplanting | 15           | 14           | 96            | 17           | 16           | 99               |
| Weeding                   | 5            | 2            | 36            | 11           | 3            | 31               |
| Other pre-harvest         | 8            | 2            | 19            | 8            | 1            | 15               |
| Harvesting and threshing  | 18           | 16           | 86            | 21           | 18           | 85               |
| Total                     | 64           | 37           | 58            | 67           | 41           | 62               |
| Laguna                    |              |              |               |              |              |                  |
| Land preparation          | 20           | 4            | 18            | 11           | 4            | 37               |
| Pulling and transplanting | 10           | 9            | 95            | 10           | 10           | 99               |
| Weeding                   | 16           | 2            | 16            | 18           | 10           | 56               |
| Other pre-harvest         | 8            | 1            | 10            | 10           | 1            | 14               |
| Harvesting and threshing  | 32           | 32           | 100           | 31           | 31           | 100              |
| Total                     | 86           | 48           | 57            | 80           | 57           | 72               |

|                          | Technology   | Technology   |
|--------------------------|--------------|--------------|
|                          | 1966         | 1970         |
| Central Luzon-Laguna     |              |              |
| Tractor users (%)        | 14           | 48           |
| Area planted to HYVs (%) | 0            | 67           |
| Yield (mt/ha)            | 1.9          | 2.7          |
| Laguna                   |              |              |
| Tractor users ( %)       | 37           | 76           |
| Area planted to HYVs (%) | 1            | 93           |
| Yield (mt/ha)            | 2.4          | 3.4          |

Source: Unpublished data from surveys conducted in the Central Luzon region and Laguna Province. See appendix for a detailed description of the location, timing and contents of each survey.

## Land preparation

Between 1966 and 1970 the increase in wet season tractor use was greatest in the rain-fed and the irrigated one-crop areas, and in both cases the land preparation labour inputs decreased by about 50 per cent (table VI). Considering all farms together, tractor users increased

## Philippine Agriculture

TABLE VI.   LABOUR INPUT AND MECHANISATION ON SEVENTY-SIX FAR MS IN THE CENTRAL LUZON REGION AND LAGUNA PROVINCE, IN THE PHILIPPI NES, 1966-67 AND 1970-71 CROP YEARS

|                                        |                                        | Labour input (man-days/ha)             | Labour input (man-days/ha)                               | Labour input (man-days/ha)             | Labour input (man-days/ha)             | Labour input (man-days/ha)             | Machine users  (%)                     | Machine users  (%)                     | Machine users  (%)                     |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Number  Year        of  farms          | Grain  yield  (mt/ha)                  | Land  prepara-  tion                   | Pulling  and  trans-  planting  and other  pre-  harvest | Weeding                                | Harvesting  and  threshing             | Total                                  |                                        | Tractor Weeder                         | Thre-  sher                            |
| Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                                               | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             | Rain-fed :                             |
| 1966    30                             | 2.2                                    | 19                                     | 25                                                       | 4                                      | 17                                     | 65                                     | 7                                      | 0                                      | 70                                     |
| 1970    29                             | 2.5                                    | 10                                     | 24                                                       | 9                                      | 22                                     | 65                                     | 48                                     | 3                                      | 83                                     |
| Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                                    | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  | Irrigated one- crop :                  |
| 1966    28                             | 1.8                                    | 18                                     | 24                                                       | 5                                      | 16                                     | 63                                     | 7                                      | 4                                      | 93                                     |
| 1970    24                             | 2.7                                    | 9                                      | 25                                                       | 12                                     | 21                                     | 67                                     | 50                                     | 17                                     | 83                                     |
| Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■                   | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -wet season  ■ |
| 1966     18                            | 1.9                                    | 13                                     | 19                                                       | 5                                      | 24                                     | 61                                     | 39                                     | 17                                     | 0                                      |
| 1970    23                             | 2.9                                    | 11                                     | 26                                                       | 12                                     | 21                                     | 70                                     | 46                                     | 35                                     | 13                                     |
| Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■                   | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ | Irrigated two-  crops-  -dry season  ■ |
| 1967     18                            | 2.5                                    | 12                                     | 23                                                       | 8                                      | 18                                     | 61                                     | 61                                     | 22                                     | 63                                     |
| 1971     23                            | 2.6                                    | 10                                     | 26                                                       | 13                                     | 22                                     | 71                                     | 74                                     | 35                                     | 74                                     |
| All farms :                            | All farms :                            | All farms :                            | All farms :                                              | All farms :                            | All farms :                            | All farms :                            | All farms :                            | All farms :                            | All farms :                            |
| 1966    76                             | 1.9                                    | 17                                     | 23                                                       | 5                                      | 18                                     | 63                                     | 14                                     | 9                                      | 62                                     |
| 1970    76                             | 2.7                                    | 10                                     | 25                                                       | 11                                     | 21                                     | 67                                     | 48                                     | 17                                     | 61                                     |

from 14 to 48 per cent and the labour input for land preparation declined from 17 to 10 man-days per hectare.  The Laguna survey showed an even 1 greater increase in tractor users, from 37 to 76 per cent, while the labour input for land preparation dechned from 20 to 11 man-days per hectare (table V). This is a case of capital being substituted for labour and there is no clear evidence that land productivity increased as a result of this substitution. Table V shows that in both survey areas there was little if any decline in hired labour for land preparation as tractor use increased, with the result that hired labour increased as a proportion of the total labour requirement.

The same effect is evident when the Central Luzon-Laguna data for 1970 are considered in terms of tractor users and non-users. Tractor

users had an average labour input of 6.6 man-days per hectare for land preparation, of which 31 per cent was hired, while for the non-users the total input was 13.5 man-days per hectare with 17 per cent hired. This finding is understandable since few farmers own their tractors while many own carabaos. Even though the absolute amount of hired labour did not change, income streams have apparently shifted from carabao owners to tractor owners. In Central Luzon the latter form a higher income group while in Laguna the distinction is not so clear.

## Weeding

Mechanical weeders have quite a different relationship to labour input (table VI). The use of mechanical weeders and the labour input for weeding always increase simultaneously. Experiment station tests indicate that using a single-row rotary weeder needs less than half the labour required for the same amount of hand weeding.  Thus, if the 1 weeding labour input had been high before rotary weeders were introduced one would expect labour displacement, but this was not the case. The increase in weeding labour could have been brought about by any combination of three factors: the high-yielding varieties made intensified weeding profitable; increased fertiliser use made increased weeding necessary; or the efficiency of the rotary weeder increased marginal returns to weeding labour.

The Laguna survey (table III) showed that the use of rotary weeders increased at a time when the number of farmers using hand weeding and herbicides was also increasing. In both the Laguna and Central LuzonLaguna study areas the hired and the total weeding labour both increased absolutely (table V). Note also that, compared with Central Luzon, a much greater use of rotary weeders in the Laguna area coexists with a substantially higher weeding labour input.

- If, as this evidence suggests, the adoption of rotary weeders results in more effective weeding, then part of the impact of their adoption is attributable to increases in land productivity.

Usually an increase in transplanting labour accompanies the adoption of rotary weeders, since straight-row planting is required and is more labour-intensive. This effect is evident in the Central LuzonLaguna data, but in the Laguna survey area it could have been offset by an increase in the use of the labour-saving dapog seedbed method. 2

The dapog seedbed, which is widely used in Laguna but rarely in Central Luzon, probably explains much of the difference between the two survey areas in labour input for pulling and transplanting.

The diifusion of high-yielding varieties has two direct eifects on labour use as a result of an upward shift in the production function: it creates an incentive to intensify labour input for crop care, and it increases the demand for harvest and post-harvest labour. The former is a possible reason for the increase in weeding labour in the survey areas, but its effect on labour use in other pre-harvest tasks does not appear to be significant.

## Harvesting and threshing

The data for all farms in the Central Luzon-Laguna survey (table VI), show that the percentages of thresher users were nearly constant; hence the effect of the yield increase can be seen in the labour input for harvesting and threshing. Strangely, no similar pattern emerges from the Laguna survey (table V). But the much higher harvest and threshing labour input in the latter area can be attributed to a combination of higher yields and the lack of mechanical threshers.

The lack of mechanical threshers in Laguna is somewhat surprising since wages are about 30 per cent higher than in Central Luzon and they reach their peak at harvest time.  Owing to higher yields, the volume 1 of grain to be threshed is also substantially greater.

There are other ways in which Central Luzon and Laguna differ, however, and these differences may explain why patterns of thresher adoption are quite different. The Gapan study indicated that most large stationary threshers in Central Luzon were introduced before the 1960s and, therefore, are a relatively old technology which may already be decHning in use. Several farmers in the Gapan study said that they discontinued using threshers in the wet season when they began double cropping, because during the early wet season harvest the fields were too wet to support big machines and threshers give low recovery rates from wet paddy. Whether or not the large stationary thresher is used does not substantially affect the harvester's share. When the grain is mechanically threshed, the harvester is not paid for threshing; rather he is paid for carrying the grain to the threshing area and stocking it in large piles.

Recently, when a United Nations Development Programme team was demonstrating a newly developed mechanical thresher in Pila, Laguna, there was a strong reaction against the machine among the hired labourers who depend upon threshing for part of their livelihood. In the same way there is considerable community pressure on the farm

operator to continue the traditional practice of sharing the benefits of the harvest with his landless neighbours by hiring them for harvesting and threshing tasks.

The labourers' resistance to mechanical threshing has an important economic reason. Harvesting and threshing wages are paid in kind, and the sharing arrangements were institutionalised at a time when yields and rice prices were both low. Consequently the effective wage for this task now makes it the highest in the entire cropping sequence and no labourer will give it up easily. In fact in Calamba, the most productive portion of the Laguna survey area (4.4 metric tons per hectare compared with 2.8 in Binan and Cabuyao), the eifective wage for harvesting and threshing is so high 1 that many labourers are willing to weed a plot without wages in return for the privilege of harvesting and threshing the same plot.  The average wage for weeding, harvesting and threshing 2 combined indicates that the " free weeding " system is a useful market mechanism which, in the face of an institutional rigidity, helps to keep wages closer to equilibrium. This kind of accommodation may help to postpone the adoption of mechanical threshers in Laguna even though yield increases push harvesting and threshing wages higher.

Any effort to mechanise threshing in Laguna will probably meet stiff resistance from hired labourers, most of whom are landless and depend heavily on transplanting, harvesting and threshing jobs for their income. It appears that few of these landless labourers are involved in land preparation and there is less resistance to the mechanisation of this task. Aside from this social pressure the thresher technology currently used in Central Luzon does not seem to be suited to the much smaller rice-growing area of Laguna.

The impact of mechanisation on employment is summarised in figure 5. This figure, based on the Central Luzon-Laguna data in table VI (all farms) emphasises the major change that has been brought about in the use of labour for specific tasks. Labour requirements for land preparation dropped from 27 to 15 per cent of the total while the labour requirements for weeding increased from 8 to 17 per cent.

An examination of the change in labour requirements between 1966 and 1970 shows that the increase in man-days per hectare was only 6.4 per cent (63 in 1966 vs. 67 in 1970). Yields rose by 40 per cent during the same period (from 1.9 metric tons per hectare to 2.7). The result is a sharp difference in labour productivity, which is what we expect

Figure 5. Change in the distribution of labour requirements on seventy-six farms located along the main highways in Central Luzon and Laguna Province, in the Philippines, 1969 vs. 1970

<!-- image -->

from new technology. In other words, on these farms it took 33 man-days to produce a ton of rice in 1966 and only 25 man-days in 1970.

In the short run there is little likelihood that labour will be displaced rapidly in the Philippine rice sector. Even on those farms that are mechanising, labour requirements per hectare have not changed significantly. The longer-run outlook for labour displacement is far less certain, however. First, using the new technology results in relatively smaller amounts of labour per ton of rice produced. Thus, when rice self-sufficiency is achieved Philippine agriculture will have to diversify if the rate of labour absorption is to keep pace with the rapidly growing population. We have discussed the potential for labour absorption through diversification elsewhere.  Second, continued encouragement, 1 particularly of larger-scale mechanisation, may affect the institutional structure of Philippine farming. Day's study of cotton farming in the

## International Labour Review

Mississippi Delta records how small-scale labour-intensive share-cropping was replaced by an extremely labour-efficient mechanical technology in less than two decades (1940-57). 1

## Policies and research strategies affecting mechanisation and employment

Patterns of mechanisation vary widely both in the Philippines and throughout tropical Asia. These patterns appear to be determined by three major criteria: (1) the profitability of machines in the performance of a particular task, which depends upon the crop grown, factor and product prices, and the cost of the technique relative to the cost of alternative methods; (2) the institutional structure and organisation of agriculture, particularly features related to farm size, the control and ownership of land and machines, and the long-term socio-economic relationships governing the employment of labour and sharing of profits and costs; and (3) the range of techniques available to each farmer.

The pattern of mechanisation may be altered either through government policies or through the results of research which makes new technology available to farmers. While government policies can affect the rate of mechanisation and employment, machines can be designed to encourage land productivity instead of merely as a substitute for human effort.

## Government policies

## In a recent article, Johnston and Kilby state that :

Since producers in every sector of the economy will combine labour, capital, and produced inputs in that proportion which minimises their costs, for any given state of technology, the pervasive and dominant determinant of differential national employment levels will always be the impact of a given set of policies on the relative prices of labour, capital, and produced inputs. Hence, it is the impact of a given development strategy upon relative factor prices, rather than the considerations of labour employment per se, which should command the attention of planners and policymakers. 2

The bias in favour of capital in the post-war economic policies of the Philippines has already been mentioned-the overvalued currency, the minimum wage laws, subsidised credit for capital purchases. Students of employment in the Philippines have concentrated their attention

on the relatively low rate of labour absorption in the manufacturing sector. 1 However, with nearly 60 per cent of the labour force engaged in agriculture, the short-run implications of these factor price distortions are potentially more important for employment in agriculture.

On the one hand, we have shown that the institutional structure of agriculture, particularly of the rice sector, is not conducive to mechanisation. Farm size is small, paddy farming presents many obstacles to mechanisation, and cost-sharing arrangements under the existing tenure patterns have been operative over a long period of time. On the other hand, it is clear that in the Philippines government policies have influenced, both directly and indirectly, the rate of mechanisation even in the rice sector.

It is not surprising, of course, to find widespread mechanisation in the production of sugar cane. Sugar cane is normally grown on large farms or haciendas and the industry has had access to the high-priced United States market for sugar. But the mechanisation of rice production has also progressed in response to government encouragement. Government policy has been a more important factor than new technology in influencing the rate of tractor use in rice production. The extention of credit for tractors at favourable interest rates accelerated tractor imports between 1966 and 1969, while the adoption of the floating exchange rate in 1970 had the opposite effect.

Small farm size has not been a major obstacle to the introduction of tractors. Most farmers rent tractor services. Although tractors perform only a portion of the land preparation task, this considerably reduces the time required and the laboriousness of the job. Our analysis does not show how the tenant uses the time saved, or what effect the reduced time lapse for land preparation has on productivity.

There are three other major areas of labour use and hence of potential labour displacement in rice production-transplanting, weeding, and harvesting and threshing. Under experimental conditions it is possible to obtain comparable yields for transplanted and broadcast rice. Although broadcasting or row seeding of rice would reduce labour by as much as ten man-days per hectare, the management and water control conditions are too exacting for normal Philippine farm conditions. Consequently, few farmers broadcast rice.

The introduction of high-yielding varieties has encouraged straightrow transplanting and the use of mechanical weeders. Our data show clearly the complementary relationship between labour for weeding and

## International Labour Review

the use of mechanical weeders. One does not need to travel very extensively in the Philippines to be convinced that weed control is a major problem. The introduction of the new seed-fertiliser technology exacerbates the weed control problem, particularly in poorly irrigated areas where the application of fertiliser stimulates the growth of weeds as well as rice. While Philippine farms are small, they are not nearly as small as Japanese, Taiwanese or Korean farms, nor do they have as good water control. Family labour is, in many cases, inadequate for proper weed control. Policies that encourage mechanical or chemical weed control, therefore, are likely to be output-increasing rather than labour-substituting.

Harvesting and thrcsning represent the most sensitive area for the introduction of mechanical technology. Under typical tenure arrangements, labourers are paid in kind one-sixth of the yield for harvesting and threshing. This is a major source of income for the many landless labourers who normally participate in this task. The introduction of mechanisation offers a direct threat to their livelihood. Since the adoption of the new seed-fertiliser technology leads to a larger rice harvest, there is a potential source of conflict between farm operators and harvesters to determine who has a claim to this added source of profit. With the higher yields, mechanical threshers are more likely to offer cost savings, but labourers understandably have no desire to change the existing share arrangement. The system of mechanical threshing used in Central Luzon appears to have been accepted by harvesters in part because it does not displace labour. Additional labour is required for stacking rice in large piles at a central location. The large stationary threshers are used most widely in the dry season when there is a low demand for labour. Improved thresher technology would be more suitable during the early wet season harvest when there is a higher demand for labour and a great loss of rice owing to improper drying and threshing.

## Research strategy

Ruttan and Hayami 1 list three stages of technology transfermaterial transfer, design transfer, and capacity transfer. The first phase is characterised by the simple transfer or import of new materials such as seeds, plants, animals and machines. In the second phase the transfer of technology is made primarily through the transfer of certain designs (blueprints, formulas, books, etc.). In the third phase the transfer of technology is made through the transfer of scientific knowledge and capacity, which permits the production of locally adapted technology. Both the success and the limitations of the Green Revolution to date emphasise very clearly the importance of capacity transfer for the develop-

ing countries. The new seeds were the product of research conducted by scientists working in the developing countries, where earlier efforts at material transfer had proved futile. However, the high-yielding varieties have benefited only a limited area, suggesting that there is still much to be gained by further strengthening adaptive research capacity in the biological sciences.

With respect to mechanical technology, countries such as the Philippines are at present still highly dependent upon material and design transfer. Most of the modern agricultural equipment used in the Philippines is imported. In the absence of machinery designs which are compatible with local manufacturing capabilities and consistent with farmers' economic and technical requirements, importation remains the only reliable source of equipment. Unfortunately, much of the machine technology currently available in world markets is unsuitable (for a variety of technical and economic reasons) for use in much of tropical Asia.

One example of research and development in the field of smallscale production and processing equipment is currently under way at the IRRI. The objectives of this programme are to provide rice farmers with machines which are tailored to the specific physical and economic requirements encountered in the tropical regions.  The machines minimise 1 the use of imported components and are designed for local manufacture with simple labour-intensive techniques which embody a high domestic value added.

The IRRI gives designs to interested manufacturers at no cost. While the programme is new, the testing and release of a number of machines, including a rice seeder, power thresher, weeder and grain cleaner, have generated widespread interest. In addition to filling a vital research and development gap in the provision of new machine technologies, the programme provides some essential guidehnes in the establishment of similar projects for other developing regions facing somewhat different economic and technical conditions.

## Concluding remarks

There is considerable fear that the mechanisation of agriculture can result in a major displacement of labour, aggravating the employment problem. The initial steps toward the mechanisation of the rice sector, stimulated by government policies and the introduction of the new rice technology, have not as yet resulted in any major labour displacement. Reduced labour requirements for land preparation have been more than offset by increased labour requirements for weeding and harvesting

and threshing. Several policies adopted by the Philippine Government over the past decade have influenced relative factor prices and credit availability and, through these, the rate of mechanisation. The adoption of the floating peso exchange rate in 1970 has helped to restore the balance between labour and capital costs. However, the higher minimum wage introduced after the adoption of the floating rate is likely to provide a further impetus for mechanisation and to have a negative effect on employment. 1

Mechanisation strategy can complement desired institutional changes such as the transfer of land to small private owners or it can have an opposite effect. The stated objective of Philippine government policy in providing credit for mechanisation is to assist small farmers. The credit however, has been used principally to finance the purchase of tractors by large landowners, and a review of credit policies in this regard may be warranted. The possession of tractors by large landowners does offer a potential threat to tenants. But we know of only a few cases where tenants have been coerced to hire tractors, or have been dispossessed by mechanisation. Custom operation of tractors, where the farm operator has the option to hire or not to hire, is the prevailing practice except on large landholdings. Nevertheless, the post-war experience with the mechanisation of cotton in the United States referred to earlier should serve as a warning that, without the proper safeguards, the institutional structure of small-scale, labour-intensive farming can be destroyed very rapidly. 2

Finally, the Philippines and other developing countries have up to now had to rely on the import of mechanical technology not well suited to local conditions. Through research it should be possible to design machines for tropical conditions. Machines which minimise the use of import components can be produced with local labour and at lower cost, thus capturing a wider market. Research should focus on those operations where the introduction of mechanical technology offers the greatest potential for increased land productivity.

## APPENDIX

The empirical evidence pertaining to employment and mechanisation on Philippine rice farms has been assembled from a number of surveys conducted by the Agricultural Economics and Engineering Departments at the IRRI. The purpose of this appendix is to provide information on the location, timing, sample size, and general content of each survey.

## The Central Luzon-Laguna survey

This survey was begun in the 1966-67 crop year over a route starting in Pila, Laguna (87 km south of Manila), running northwards and making a loop through the five major rice-growing provinces of Central Luzon. The route is along the main highway and therefore represents an area where change in technology is relatively rapid. Since 1966-67 there have been two subsequent surveys of the original respondents in the 1968 and 1970 wet seasons to ascertain changes in their use of inputs and their adoption of improved practices. From the 118 initial respondents, 76 complete records are available for the wet seasons of 1966 and 1970. Nine of these are in Laguna and the remainder are in Central Luzon.

## The Laguna survey

This study consists of a series of annual surveys conducted in the wet seasons 1966 to 1970. Information was obtained regarding farm production practices, costs and returns. The respondents were a random sample from three municipalities of Laguna Province-Binan, Cabuyao and Calamba. These areas differ in water resources-Calamba has year-round gravity irrigation, Cabuyao farms are irrigated with low-lift pumps, and Binan has gravity irrigation water available for only three crops in two years. Of the 153 respondents, 54 were located in Calamba, 58 in Cabuyao and 41 in Binan.

## The Gapan survey

This study was conducted in the wet season of 1970 in the municipality of Gapan, Nueva Ecija Province-the largest of the rice-growing provinces in Central Luzon. The study included a survey of all tractor and mechanical thresher owners and a stratified sample of 513 farmers. (Gapan has about 2,200 farmers and nearly 7,000 hectares of farmland.) Data on farm practices for previous years were gathered at the same time by recall. The total sample is divided according to tenure and land type as follows in 1970:

| Type of land        |   Owner |   Leaseholder |   Share-tenant |   Total |
|---------------------|---------|---------------|----------------|---------|
| Irrigated two crop  |      35 |           153 |            138 |     326 |
| Partially irrigated |       4 |            25 |             26 |      55 |
| Rain-fed            |      31 |            36 |             65 |     132 |
| Total               |      70 |           214 |            229 |     513 |