## ORIGINAL PAPER

## Engineering and labor specialization during the industrial revolution

## Darrell J. Glaser · Ahmed S. Rahman

Received: 18 February 2013 / Accepted: 3 June 2013

/C211 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Abstract This paper explores how technological changes affected labor allocations within the U.S. Navy. During the latter nineteenth century, the officer corps was highly specialized, split between groups of line and staff officers. Developments in general purpose technologies created a dilemma for the organization, as it balanced between the benefits of a specialized workforce implementing increasingly complex technologies with rising communication and coordination costs. We first document the nature and extent of labor specialization in the mid-nineteenthcentury Navy-engineers worked more with newer and larger vessels, while line officers worked more with unskilled personnel. The Navy endeavored to destroy this distinction, forcing generalized training and tasks for all officers. We suggest that the Navy's phased-in approach was an effective strategy, helping the U.S. to become a world-class naval power.

Keywords Skilled labor complementarity /C1 Skill-replacing and skill-using technology /C1 Labor allocation

JEL Classification J2 /C1 J7 /C1 N3 /C1 N7 /C1 O3

## 1 Introduction

This paper explores how capital- and technology-skill complementarities influenced task specialization and labor allocation in the U.S. Navy during the latter nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The exploration provides us a glimpse into how a

D. J. Glaser

/C1

A. S. Rahman ( &amp; )

Department of Economics, United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD, USA

e-mail: rahman@usna.edu

D. J. Glaser

e-mail: dglaser@usna.edu

<!-- image -->

large and complex bureaucracy handled dramatic technological changes during a formative period in American economic history. Goldin and Katz (1998) document capital-skill complementarities in U.S. manufacturing as far back as the beginning of the twentieth century. Earlier periods, however, remain mysterious to us due to data limitations. Here, we look at the various relations between workers, capital, and technologies in a critical and dramatically evolving organization.

We view the naval vessel as a floating firm, an island of productivity in which capital-embodied technology is employed by various types of skilled and unskilled labor. Naval ''production'' is geared toward meeting specific objectives, such as to influence trade patterns or facilitate diplomacy, which necessarily requires sending ships out to sea. As the United States during the latter nineteenth century transitioned from its traditional limited strategy of commerce raiding and shore protection ( guerre de course ) to a far more muscular naval strategy ( guerre d'escadre ), these endeavors grew increasingly vital to the health of U.S. commerce and security (Buhl 1978). 1 In this sense, the Navy was a critical ''industry'' in the overall economy, one from which we can learn a great deal. 2

This transition posed some major challenges for the Navy. One of the big debates among top naval brass was over the degree of specialization among members of the officer corps. The technological and structural changes happening within the Navy tended to be engineer oriented, raising the relative importance of engineering skill in naval operations. Changes also influenced general purpose technologies, affecting nearly every aspect of naval operations. 3 As these operations grew increasingly complex, the Navy could conceivably raise productivity through a more extensive division of labor, where each officer could focus on a narrower range of tasks. However, these changes could also exacerbate communication and coordination costs among officers, in which case a more generic or superficial division of labor might be more productive. 4 The balance is one which all productive entities need to strike-when should an organization maintain a highly specialized workforce and when should it have a more homogenous one (Borghans and Weel 2006)?

The U.S. Navy of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries makes for an informative case study on this balancing act. This study provides a glimpse into how technology affected labor allocation and specialization during a major turning point

in the history of modernization. 5 Like the Navy, organizations and industries around the country faced changes in general purpose technologies. During this time, the naval corps was highly specialized, split by legislation into groups of line and staff officers (McBride 2000). There were two kinds of skilled workers: regular-line officers (who acted as managers) and naval engineers (who acted as technocrats); these skilled laborers worked with capital-embodied technology (the naval vessel) and unskilled labor (the vessel's complement of sailors). In this context, we observe the extent of each skilled labor-type's complementarities with capital, raw labor, evolving naval technology, and each other. We also study changes in these complementarities, as the Navy balanced its need for performing many specialized tasks with its increasing need for a more homogenous workforce with similar naval skills and training.

We exploit a unique dataset that contains the names and profiles of officers who joined the Navy between the years 1865 to 1905, as well as the names and profiles of every serving naval engineer from 1870 to 1899. We merge this information with their duty and service records. We also record the names, personnel, characteristics, and station of every U.S. naval vessel from 1870 to 1911. The final compilation gives us the singular ability to link different kinds of physical capital, human capital, and technologies for a dynamic and developing organization in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

Our analysis uncovers a number of things. For the early part of our sample (mainly the 1870s and 80s), there were very clear capital-skill and technology-skill complementarities in ''naval production.'' Specifically, proxies for technology and naval capital are positively associated with the numbers of engineers assigned to active vessels. On the other hand, officers appear to strongly complement unskilled labor in service on active ships. The findings suggest that naval labor during this time was highly specialized-management-type skills worked closely with personnel, whereas engineer-type skills worked less with people and more with machinery and technical apparatus.

We also find that these technology-skill complementarities changed, starting in the 1890s. Specifically, the Navy made a concerted effort of vitiating the specialized human capital of the officer corps through labor amalgamation. Through this, the Navy stressed a more generalized skill set among all naval personnel. However, the Navy was still able to allocate labor according to more intensive measures of human capital, through the skills and experience embedded in officers. This was likely important for the Navy to continue to implement engineer-intensive general purpose technologies. Indeed, we find no evidence to suggest that amalgamation disrupted naval operations in the early twentieth century. If anything, the post-Amalgamation Navy was significantly more productive than its nineteenth-century predecessor.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some background and motivation. Section 3 gives some details on our empirical strategy, and Sect. 4 describes the data. Section 5 details our results.

## 2 Background

## 2.1 Naval technological change in the late nineteenth century

The late nineteenth-century Navy employed a heterogenous fleet of vessels which were built between the 1850s and 1890s. All these were steamships, but each had dramatically different technological designs which were highly dependent on the years of their conceptions. 6 While naval operations have always been fairly technical, 7 nearly every facet of the naval ship underwent radical technological transformation during the latter nineteenth century. These changes included the switch from sail to steam propulsion, the ironcladding of wooden hulls, the full construction of iron hulls, the switch from paddle-wheels to propellers, and the implementation of rifled barrels and exploding projectiles in naval ordnance. Indeed, ' 'by century's end, warships were complex systems that bore little resemblance to those fifty years earlier'' (McBride 2000).

All these changes occurred progressively and chronologically through the latter nineteenth century and required officers who could master the technologies being newly implemented. The naval profession in fact was being transformed into a technology- and science-based profession. Similar transformations were occurring in many manufacturing industries throughout the Western world (Mokyr 2002), particularly in those involving steam and mechanical engineering. Steam technology was an iconic part of industrialization and a prime example of a general purpose technology (Rosenberg and Trajtenberg 2004). 8

Change came sluggishly at first, particularly during the 1870s. Perhaps, the biggest factor contributing to this was the acknowledgement (and fear) that naval developments would inevitably be engineering in focus, empowering engineers over traditional line officers (Tomblin 1988). It became increasingly clear that engineering had grown in importance in the employment and maintenance of naval power during the Civil War (Davis and Engerman 2006) and was only becoming more important in the post-bellum world.

Engineer-oriented change came in a major way starting in the late 1870s, when there were two distinct waves of technological development-the construction of the armored ABCD ships, and the four modern heavy cruisers Texas , Maine , New York , and Olympia . The navy thus began its attempts to converge to the technological frontier in earnest by the 1880s. For example, in 1886, American officers made technical pilgrimages to Europe, paying $2,500 to purchase foreign designs of naval warships (Vlahos 1989). The development of the Charleston in 1887 owed much of its design to imitations of British vessels (Bennett 1896).

After this, an even greater push for modernization was made by Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Tracy, who established the Board of Construction in 1889 to coordinate the bureaus' efforts to produce optimal warship designs themselves (McBride 2000). The vessels subsequently built and launched were radically different in both design and ability. In fact to some, ''the new navy [was] one so different from much that [had] preceded...as to make it a subject by itself, only slightly connected with all that [had] gone before'' (Bennett 1896). Yet, from the end of the war to the beginnings of this ''new navy,'' some forty new war steamers had been added to the Fleet (Vlahos 1989), contributing to the radical mix of ship designs extant in the late nineteenth-century Navy.

Along with propulsion, vessels began to develop steam engineering techniques to clear bilges of water. Further, as vessels began to increase in size, steering by manual labor became increasingly onerous, and new steam techniques to steer ships were developed and implemented (Smith 1938).

The increase in the size of naval guns also led to the introduction of machinery for controlling them. As early as 1861, there existed a system of mounting heavy guns on a turntable, the revolution, gun motion, and recoil all powered by steam. Such turrets worked by steam became standard in newer vessels, replacing wooden carriages and manual labor.

These are but a few examples of how general purpose technical changes were altering the optimal mix of skilled labor aboard vessels. As vessels grew larger, steam was increasing being applied to pumping, steering, the working of guns, the distilling of water, and the charging of torpedoes, along with its traditional role in propulsion. But how the Navy actually allocated engineering and traditional skills across the fleet remains unexplored. For example, according to one article from the late nineteenth century, a steam frigate of 1,000 horsepower in 1865 had nine engineers; in 1896, an armored steam cruiser of 17,000 horsepower had only five. 9 We wish to inquire, among other things, whether this example was emblematic of replacement of engineers on technologically advanced vessels, or rather an interesting exception to the general rule of greater engineering skills employed on such vessels.

The convergence to the naval technological frontier happened in earnest starting in the 1890s and culminated in the building and launching of the Great White Fleet in the nineteen-aughts. This clearly involved a dramatic and complicated embrace of engineering technologies (Hackemer 2001). The technological developments of the navy in many ways mirrored American industry-relatively backward in the 1870s and 80s, yet rapidly developing by the 90s with a renewed focus on competing with the industrial superpowers of Britain and Germany (Vlahos 1989).

So how did these developments influence labor allocation in the Navy? Further, how did the Navy handle (and eventually overcome) the fear among traditionalists that their roles would be subservient and their skills would become irrelevant? The nineteenth-century U.S. Navy, made up of a mongrel mix of old and new ships, provides us a rich environment to explore these questions.

## 2.2 Naval engineering and the pre-amalgamated line

The post-bellum navy was one that embraced specialization. By dint of legislation passed in 1867, the corps was split between traditional line officers and engineer officers, forming an organization with a fairly specialized labor structure. During this period, naval personnel was ''pre-amalgamated''-that is, line and engineer officers had explicitly separate designations and ostensibly different duties. One primary question is would (and should) the Navy embrace such a specialized framework as new technologies continued to be developed and implemented?

As studies such as Acemoglu (2007) suggest, capital-augmenting technological progress should increase the relative demand for labor in a two-factor production process when capital and labor are grossly complementary. This could be a fairly apt description of the Navy-technological developments embodied in vessels greatly raised the need for skilled personnel. One officer described the difficulties the navy had in progressing technologically as arising from the failure of ''officers in high position to realize the duality of the naval profession, to realize that a navy consists of both personnel and material, the two of equal importance, and each useless without the other'' (McBride 1992).

Further, such developments were likely biased toward particular skills. For example, Chin et al. (2006) find that technological developments in the merchant shipping industry during the late nineteenth century created a greater demand for engineers and tended to replace moderately skilled able-bodied seamen. So how did naval technological developments influence skill-labor personnel during this time? Again, we need to look to the data to discern the patterns.

At heart here is the debate over the role of specialization and the proper division of labor as technologies evolve. 10 In many respects, progress and greater labor specialization go hand in hand. Specialization generates classic gains from trade, and expertise develops through learning by doing particular tasks. Indeed, productivity can rise directly through the specialization of labor (Kim and Mohtadi 1992). And complex tasks require a great deal of specialization to minimize the potential of failure (Kremer 1993).

Naval developments particularly suggested the need for a specialized officer corps. As technologies became more engineer-oriented, the Navy required a core group of experts to manage and implement these changes. Bennett (1896) stresses the critical need for engineers during this time as the primary inspectors and constructors of machinery, and as directors of ''the most needful fighting factor in the ship-power.'' Suchresponsibilities could not be heaped upon regular-line officers, since they generally had no idea about the workings of steam technologies. A telling account comes from Commander R. S. Robinson of the Royal Navy, who wrote in 1839 11

We go into the engine room, we look at the outside of an engine, various rods of highly polished iron are moving about, a beam is observed vibrating up and down, all is clean and bright and well arranged, but the working parts of the

<!-- image -->

engine, the moving power is entirely shut out from our sight, and after staying a few minutes and, perhaps, asking a question or two, which from the very depths of ignorance it betrays, it is scarcely possible the engineer can or will answer, we walk up again, with no additions to our knowledge, and rather convinced that the whole subject is incomprehensible.

This tale of technological bewilderment was a common refrain among line officers in the nineteenth century U.S. Navy, suggesting the deeply complementary and specialized nature of officer functions. Allen (1976) describes at length a new ' 'corporate'' form of organization needed to embrace and implement new naval technologies-''specialization had to replace Old Navy self-sufficiency and omnicompetence; cooperation (between near-equals) or 'teamwork' had to replace aristocratic monopolization of command privileges.'' No longer could officers embrace ' 'aristocratic individualism,'' where every officer understood every component of naval operations. In the new Navy, one officer relied on another for the expertise he knew he did not possess.

Yet, there were also a number of perceived costs from such specialization in the face of general purpose technological developments, and the potential shortcomings of greater labor divisions occupied naval dialectics for decades. For one, economists have often described rising communication costs among personnel as a potential hindrance to specialization patterns. Autor (2001) describes how infrequent use of specialized workers can reduce transaction costs and thereby raise gains from specialization. Yet, naval developments during this time arguably worked in reverse-as technologies grew, the need for engineers grew with it. But this raised transaction costs, and thus decreased potential gains from specialization.

Another problem was the coordination necessary to link complementary officers and engineers with naval capital. Determining which ships and people were at which stations, and which should be matched upon deployment, was surely an impossibly complex process. An organization simply becomes less limber with a higher degree of specialized labor. 12 Coordination on the other hand becomes easier when all personnel have similar backgrounds and skills. Thus the ''many sudden emergencies and trying circumstances attending the war operations of the navy'' described by Bennett (1896) may have required both theoretical knowledge and practicable ability for many officers, not merely a few engineering specialists. The ' 'omni-competence'' of labor described by Allen (1976) provides convenience, particulary given the uncertainties of future naval operations. 13 Technological

changes that generate greater complementarities can also produce a more sclerotic structure. Indeed, today's Navy suggests exploiting dynamic capabilities by maintaining a more flexible organization (Sternad 2011). Organizations of all kinds must generally strike a balance between the productivity of its individual workers and the limberness of its whole workforce.

Yet another concern over a highly specialized officer corps was that it could create a ' 'separate but equal'' dynamic in the workplace, stoking internal strife within the service and potentially fostering an internecine war between line and engineer officers. Engineers were physically separated from officers, working below decks out of sight and often out of mind (McBride 2000). This separation manifested itself in many adverse ways. The most common complaint among engineers was that they were typically not permitted the use of the wardroom for mess and sleeping quarters (Calvert 1967). Such petty issues could magnify into serious hindrances for naval operations. High-ranking officials such as David Porter (Superintendent of the Naval Academy during the latter 1860s) and Alfred Mahan often referred to engineers pejoratively and resisted engineer-biased technological changes (Bennett 1896). Those who embraced a more homogenized corps envisioned an engineering background for all officers, so that engineer-oriented developments would be better understood and embraced. Furthermore, naval operations could be jeopardized if fighting efficiency depended upon the technical understanding of the captain and a close relationship with his engineers. 14

Finally, conflicts stoked by the separation between the old guard of line officers and new staff officers may have contributed to technological stagnation and outright naval decline (Karsten 1972; Allen 1976). Because the old guard viewed engineeroriented developments as destruction rather than progress, they resisted them, often successfully (Coletta 1987). This created a further impetus for engineers to leave naval service, as developments in private industry dramatically raised the relative pecuniary rewards in private-sector engineer-oriented professions (Glaser and Rahman 2012). 15 Such a hollowing out of the skilled workforce posed yet more problems for a Navy attempting to modernize.

## 2.3 Naval education in the pre-amalgamation era

During this period, all line officers, and a great many staff officers, received their pre-service education at the United States Naval Academy. As the educational arm of the Navy, the Academy likewise grappled with the tradeoffs between generalized and specialized human capital for the officer corps. While specialized education can improve worker productivity for a given activity, a generalized education renders workers more adaptable to a variety of activities (Kim 1989). Throughout this period, the Naval Academy struggled in balancing between the former (training and

educating future line and engineer officers separately for the last 2 years of their studies) and the latter (where all midshipmen went through the same program and took a combination of traditional and engineering classes).

The Academy always had its ''generalists'' who wished to combine the talents of line and engineer officers into the same individuals, and they pursued their vision with intermittent vigor in the post-bellum period. Steam was made part of the curriculum for all students in 1861 (Calvert 1967). Engineer-in-Chief Benjamin Isherwood stressed to Secretary of the Navy Gideon Wells the need to revamp engineering instruction at the Academy. Soon after the Department of Steam Engineering was established. In his 1864 annual report, Secretary Wells described the labor allocation issues stemming from ''the radical changes which have been wrought by steam as a motive power for naval vessels.'' Because it seemed that officers were capable of performing only a few specialized tasks, ''[we should make] our officers engine-drivers as well as sailors...we should begin by teaching each midshipman to be able to discharge the duties of line officers and engineers, to combine the two into one profession, so that officers so educated can take their watch alternatively in the engine room and on deck.'' 16 When the Academy returned to Annapolis in 1865, Congress appropriated $20,000 for new facilities for the engineering department (Bennett 1896). Secretary Wells applauded the new facilities, urging for their maximum use and warning that line officers untrained in steam engineering would be ''taking a secondary position'' within the profession. 17

Yet, due to the specialized needs of the fleet, the Academy also episodically offered a program that graduated engineer officers. 18 Cadet engineers would enroll in a two-year program focused on steam and mechanical engineering after completing their first two years of regular officer instruction. The program began in 1866, graduating its first group of engineers in 1868, but ended immediately after due to funding. The program was reinstated in 1872, abolished again in 1882 due to the Personnel Act, and established once more in 1888 (Calvert 1967).

Thus, in three distinct waves, the Academy produced engineer officers who worked along with line officers aboard naval vessels. But 1899 was the last ever graduating class of the engineer-cadet program. Why did the program end?

## 2.4 The post-amalgamated line

In 1899, engineer officers were simply absorbed into the ''new line.'' Labeled the Amalgamation Act of 1899, the action was a direct result of a study made by the Personnel Board under the chairmanship of Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt two years before (McBride 2000). According to Roosevelt, ' 'On the modern war vessel, every officer has to be an engineer whether he wants to or not.'' 19 Amalgamation was the implicit expression among naval leadership that

the generalists had in effect won the debate, and the recognition of the necessity of engineering training for all naval officers. A common refrain was that ''the modern ship is a machine … All the problems on a modern battleship are engineering in their nature, and there is no problem which cannot be solved by the man whose early education has been largely in mechanics and engineering.'' 20

More broadly amalgamation manifested the awareness that America remained fairly weak in human capital and that industrial technologies required a workforce with backgrounds in technical training and professionalism (Vlahos 1989). The embrace of naval engineering for its entire personnel suggested the Navy echoed broader industrial demands for the United States to train and develop a technically skilled workforce.

The Navy had to respond to the order, both on the education and the labor allocation fronts. The Naval Academy retooled its curriculum to once again produce omni-competent officers, but this generated concern that new graduates would be long on breadth and short on depth. Furthermore, the Amalgamation Act in fact did not require midshipmen to study more engineering, while it did require naval engineers to pass a test on seamanship to qualify as deck watch officers (McBride 2000). The chief of the Bureau of Steam Engineering saw the potential flaw of the new design in 1904: ''So few officers of the line are taking up engineering seriously that the situation is becoming alarming'' (McBride 2000).

Yet, amalgamation also had its staunch defenders. In a 1905 article, lieutenant commander Lloyd Chandler presented an extensive defense of the new amalgamated line. He forcefully painted the merger of officer human capital as a necessary one in order for the U.S. to compete in world naval affairs, claiming that the ' 'blindness of caste [that ruled]...that a man cannot be a military officer and a mechanic at the same time'' was once and for all destroyed. 21

Amalgamation was a watershed in the institutional history of the U.S. Navy. It destroyed the de jure distinction between line and staff; there remained, however, a core group of erstwhile engineers who suddenly had line officer status. Were their education and backgrounds reallocated in a fundamentally different way? How did the Navy alter its labor allocation strategy? Did there remain a de facto extensive human capital margin upon which the Navy continued to operate, and if not would naval operations be jeopardized?

## 3 Empirical framework

To empirically analyze some of the themes raised in the last section, we regress alternative measures of skilled labor and skill intensity levels on a set of ship characteristics. These are panel estimations at the ship-year unit of observation. 22

Table 1 Descriptive statistics of ships (conditional on active service)

| Ship characteristics                            | Observations   |    Mean |   Standard deviation |   Minimum | Maximum   |
|-------------------------------------------------|----------------|---------|----------------------|-----------|-----------|
| Engineers (ship-year observation)               | 1,370          |   2.19  |                2.01  |     0     | 10        |
| Officers (ship-year observation)                | 1,327          |   7.05  |                3.22  |     0     | 18        |
| Perc. engineers (ship-year observation)         | 1,297          |   0.216 |                0.174 |     0     | 1         |
| Age (ship-year observation)                     | 1,345          |  12.94  |                7.94  |     1     | 46        |
| Avg. officer experience (ship-year observation) | 748            |  14.5   |                5.1   |     0.26  | 35.20     |
| Max speed (knots)                               | 188            |  13.4   |                4.1   |     4     | 30        |
| Displacement (1,000 tons)                       | 205            |   3.86  |                4.19  |     0.042 | 20.38     |
| Length (feet)                                   | 205            | 259.54  |               91.7   |    70     | 518       |
| Complement (sailors)                            | 175            | 297.04  |              231.04  |    12     | 1,108     |
| Cumulative time at sea (ship-year observation)  | 1,370          |   5.49  |                4.62  |     1     | 33        |

For many of these, we split the analysis between the periods 1870-1899 (pre-amalgamation) and 1901-1911 (post-amalgamation), or use decade interaction terms to gauge changes in allocation decisions (Table 1).

## 3.1 Engineer and officer counts

To estimate the effects of capital and technology on the number of skilled workers assigned to specific vessels, we define y as a non-negative count variable with integer values 0, 1, 2, … . Specifically, this represents the total number of engineers or officers assigned to ships. Poisson regression is a natural empirical specification for the analysis of count data such as this. An examination of the distribution of engineers and officers shown in Fig. 3 provides further motivation for the assumption of a Poisson model. Following Wooldridge (2002), the conditional mean given the vector x is defined E y ( | x , g b ; ) = exp ( x b g ) . Initially, we assume E ( g | x ) = E ( g ) = 1, which implies that standard quasi-maximum likelihood techniques (QML) consistently estimate the parameters of the model. Our interest is in the K 9 1 vector of parameters in b . Results from these regressions are reported in Tables 2, 3, 4 for ships serving at sea both for the nineteenth century and the early twentieth century. 23

## 3.2 Measures of skill intensity

We also exploit alternative measures of skill and the panel structure of the data to evaluate how changes in the capital and technological characteristics of ships lead to

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| 01-11 01-11     | - 0.012 - 0.026 (0.15)   | (0.12)          | - 0.19 -                          | (0.15)                 | 0.002 -             | (0.006)         | 0.11 - 0.117              | (0.07) (0.09)   | 0.210*** 0.010 (0.05) (0.007)    | 0.007*** - (0.002)   | 455 395          | 113 85             | 0.24 -          | Yes Yes Yes                                     | Yes                | Yes No               | No Yes                                                     |
|-----------------|--------------------------|-----------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------|---------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|-----------------|----------------------------------|----------------------|------------------|--------------------|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| 01-11           | 0.03                     | (0.12)          | - 0.06                            | (0.08)                 | 0.01**              | (0.005)         | 0.20***                   | (0.05)          | 0.230*** (0.06)                  | -                    | 492              | 123                | 0.20            | Yes                                             | Yes                | Yes                  | No                                                         |
| 70-99 01-11     | - 0.04** 0.10***         | (0.02) (0.026)  | - 0.039                           | (0.08)                 | - 0.01**            | (0.003) (0.005) | 0.24***                   | (0.031) (0.05)  | - (0.022)                        | 0.001 - (0.001)      | 579 492          | 92 112 123         | 0.18 0.17       | Yes Yes Yes Yes No                              | Yes                | Yes No               |                                                            |
| 70-99 70-99     | - 0.03* - 0.078***       | (0.017) (0.028) | 0.40*** -                         | (0.036)                | 0.003 0.0005 -      | (0.002)         | 0.09*** 0.065*            | (0.030)         | 0.049*** 0.12*** (0.016) (0.036) | - -                  | 786              | 784 123            | 0.18 -          | Yes                                             | Yes No             | Yes No No            | Standard errors shown in parentheses, bootstrap estimators |
| Variables 70-99 | Vessel age - 0.03***     | (0.01)          | Displacement (1,000 tons) 0.39*** | 0.45*** (0.035) (0.07) | Length (feet) 0.001 | (0.002)         | Officers 0.115*** 0.087** | (0.026) (0.034) | Cum sea - 0.066***               | Complement -         | Observations 784 | No. of vessels 123 | Pseudo R 2 0.16 | Year effects Yes Yes Age*cohort interactions No | Yes Random effects | Yes Fixed effects No |                                                            |

Table 3 Poisson regressions of engineers assigned to active vessels on vessel characteristics (1870-1911)-evidence of ''phasing-in''

| Variables                 | (1)                  | (2)                      | (3)                       | (4)                          | (5)                                  |
|---------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Vessel age                | - 0.009 (0.006)      | - 0.015** (0.007)        | 0.009 (0.077)             | - 0.003 (0.19)               | - 0.010 (0.19)                       |
| Displacement (1,000 tons) | 0.086                | 0.091***                 | 0.089***                  | 0.031                        | 0.046                                |
| Length (feet)             | (0.015)              | (0.015)                  | (0.016)                   | (0.029)                      | (0.033)                              |
|                           | 0.002***             | 0.002***                 | 0.002***                  | 0.002***                     | 0.0017**                             |
|                           | (0.0005)             |                          |                           |                              | (0.0008)                             |
|                           | 0.044***             | (0.0005) 0.042***        | (0.0006)                  | (0.0007)                     | 0.032***                             |
| Officers                  | (0.010)              | (0.008)                  | 0.039*** (0.008)          | 0.034*** (0.011)             | (0.010)                              |
| Age*1890s                 | - 0.008 (0.008)      | - 0.009 (0.008) 0.029*** | - -                       | - -                          | - -                                  |
| Age*1900s                 | 0.027***             |                          |                           |                              |                                      |
|                           | (0.010)              | (0.012)                  |                           |                              |                                      |
| Disp*1870s                | - 0.007 (0.044)      | - 0.0045 (0.038)         | - 0.010 (0.047)           | 0.18*** (0.08)               | 0.18*** (0.07)                       |
| Disp*1890s                | 0.018                | 0.022                    | 0.015                     | -                            | 0.0008                               |
|                           | (0.027)              | (0.031)                  |                           | 0.005 (0.054)                | (0.06)                               |
| Disp*1900s Comp*1870s     | - 0.032*** (0.015) - | - 0.035*** (0.016) -     | (0.025) - 0.038** (0.017) | - 0.084** (0.04) - 0.0026*** | - 0.09** (0.04) - 0.0025*** (0.0007) |
| Comp*1880s                | -                    | -                        | -                         | (0.0008) - 0.0018*           | - 0.0018*                            |
| Comp*1890s                | -                    | -                        | -                         | (0.001)                      | (0.001)                              |
|                           |                      |                          |                           | 0.0006                       |                                      |
|                           |                      |                          | -                         | (0.001)                      | 0.0006 (0.001)                       |
| Comp*1900s Observations   | - 1,276 210          | - 1,276 210              | - 1,276 210               | 0.002** (0.001) 1,034 172    | 0.0016** (0.00008)                   |
| 2                         |                      | 0.30                     |                           | 0.32                         | 1,034 172                            |
| No. of vessels            |                      |                          |                           |                              |                                      |
|                           | 0.28                 |                          | 0.31                      |                              |                                      |
| R                         |                      |                          |                           |                              |                                      |
| Age*cohort interactions   |                      |                          |                           |                              |                                      |
|                           |                      | No                       | Yes                       |                              | Yes                                  |
| Pseudo                    |                      |                          |                           |                              |                                      |
|                           |                      | Yes                      |                           |                              | 0.32                                 |
| Year effects              | Yes                  |                          | Yes                       | Yes                          |                                      |
|                           | No                   |                          |                           | Yes                          | Yes                                  |
| Random effect             |                      |                          | Yes                       | Yes                          | Yes                                  |
|                           | Yes                  | Yes                      |                           |                              |                                      |

Standard errors shown in parentheses, bootstrap estimators

*** p \ 0.01, ** p \ 0.05, * p \ 0.1

Table 4 Poisson regressions of officers assigned to active vessels on vessel characteristics (1870-1911)

| Variables                | 70-99            | 70-99              | 70-99             | 70-99            | 01-11            | 01-11             | 01-11             | 01-11          |
|--------------------------|------------------|--------------------|-------------------|------------------|------------------|-------------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Vessel age               | - 0.013* (0.006) | - 0.034*** (0.009) | - 0.007 (0.015)   | 0.002 (0.020)    | 0.003 (0.012)    | - 0.068*** (0.03) | - 0.02 (0.02)     | - 0.008 (0.05) |
| Displacement (1000 tons) | 0.215*** (0.03)  | 0.23*** (0.03)     | 0.075 (0.05)      | -                | 0.02 (0.02)      | 0.029 (0.03)      | - 0.07 (0.05)     | -              |
| Length (feet)            | 0.002 (0.002)    | 0.003*** (0.001)   | 0.002 (0.002)     | -                | 0.012*** (0.001) | 0.010*** (0.002)  | 0.008*** (0.002)  | -              |
| Engineers                | 0.108*** (0.03)  | 0.090*** (0.03)    | 0.058* (0.035)    | 0.010*** (0.031) | 0.092 (0.06)     | 0.063 (0.044)     | 0.016 (0.05)      | - 0.05 (0.06)  |
| Cum sea                  | - (0.007)        | 0.037*** (0.010)   | 0.013 (0.010)     | 0.0005 (0.0006)  | -                | 0.065*** (0.017)  | 0.021 (0.018)     | 0.0006 (0.002) |
| Complement               | -                | -                  | 0.003*** (0.0005) | -                | -                | -                 | 0.004*** (0.0007) | -              |
| Observations             | 784              | 784                | 579               | 786              | 492              | 492               | 455               | 482            |
| No. of vessels           | 123              | 123                | 92                | 112              | 123              | 123               | 113               | 109            |
| Pseudo R 2               | 0.07             | 0.09               | 0.09              | -                | 0.25             | 0.26              | 0.28              | -              |
| Year effects             | Yes              | Yes                | Yes               | Yes              | Yes              | Yes               | Yes               | Yes            |
| Age*cohort interactions  | No               | Yes                | Yes               | Yes              | No               | Yes               | Yes               | Yes            |
| Random effects           | Yes              | Yes                | Yes               | No               | Yes              | Yes               | Yes               | No             |
| Fixed effects            | No               | No                 | No                | Yes              | No               | No                | No                | Yes            |

Standard errors shown in parentheses, bootstrap estimators

All specifications include squared regressors (not shown)

*** p \ 0.01, ** p \ 0.05, * p \ 0.1

changes in the mix of skills assigned to ships. The unobserved effects model estimates various measures of skill intensity on ship i over time t following the specification

$$yit ¼ xit b þ a i þ uit ; t ¼ 1 2 ; ; ::::; T : ð 1 Þ$$

The random variable a i controls for unobserved ship heterogeneity and improves estimate efficiency in the K 9 1 vector b . By construction, estimates follow from the assumption that a i is not correlated with xit . Results from FGLS estimation of a variety of skill measures on ships using (1) appear in Tables 5, 6, 7, 8.

## 4 Data

Much of our data originate from official U.S. Navy Registers. These annual volumes published by the United States Navy document the duty and station of every serving officer and every naval vessel. From these volumes, we determine the names and numbers of officers and engineers assigned to each vessel each year, as well as the station (location/tour) of each vessel. There are typically core groups of each skilled labor-type during each ship's international tour, but nevertheless a

Table 5 Average experience of engineers on active vessels (in days, 1870-1899)

| Variables                 | (1)        | (2)        | (3)         |
|---------------------------|------------|------------|-------------|
| Age                       | 36.35**    | 30.06      | - 30.94     |
|                           | (16.61)    | (21.1)     | (68.99)     |
| Displacement (1,000 tons) | - 338.6*** | - 222.4*** | - 259.81*** |
|                           | (52.59)    | (75.70)    | (81.19)     |
| Length                    | 4.12       | 1.62       | 2.79        |
|                           | (3.06)     | (3.02)     | (3.17)      |
| Cum sea                   | 0.23       | 0.186      | - 0.269     |
|                           | (0.278)    | (0.328)    | (0.397)     |
| Complement                | -          | - 1.05     | - 0.94      |
|                           |            | (1.20)     | (1.15)      |
| Observations              | 735        | 543        | 543         |
| Number of vessels         | 123        | 92         | 92          |
| Overall R 2               | 0.55       | 0.53       | 0.56        |
| Year effects              | Yes        | Yes        | Yes         |
| Age*cohort interactions   | No         | No         | Yes         |

Random effects included for all regressions (FGLS)

Bootstrap standard errors shown in parentheses, with *** p \ 0.01, ** p \ 0.05, * p \ 0.1

remarkable degree of year-to-year fluctuation in personnel exists even during the same tours. 24

Naval registry data are matched with three other sources. The first is the appendix of Bennett (1896), which lists every serving naval engineer up until 1896. This is used to construct basic experience measures for each engineer. This work also includes a list of vessels and basic ship attributes such as displacement, ship dimension, and year of build. The second source, the Dictionary of Fighting Ships, augments ship information in Bennett (1896). This also includes newer vessels and other vessel traits such as the complement (the number of sailors and other crew members) and ship cruising speeds.

Finally, we use Naval Academy registers to document officer performance as midshipmen at the Academy on a variety of subjects for the graduating classes of 1865-1905. 25 This also allows us to track each officer's class year and thus produce basic experience measures for ship personnel. We do not have a one-for-one mapping between personnel and their Naval Academy education, and this is due to a number of factors. The primary reason is lack of coverage-for vessels during the 1870s, we only have information for relatively younger officers; for vessels after 1905, we do not have any information on newly commissioned officers. Further, many engineers employed by the Navy were not commissioned officers and did not go through the Academy; this is particularly true for the earlier part of our data

Table 6 Average experience of all officers on active vessels (in years, 1870-1899)

| Variables                 | (1)        | (2)        | (3)        | (4)        |
|---------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Age                       | 0.028*     | 0.073      | 0.017      | - 0.011    |
|                           | (0.015)    | (0.051)    | (0.020)    | (0.10)     |
| Displacement (1,000 tons) | - 0.27**   | - 0.27**   | - 0.23*    | - 0.19     |
|                           | (0.11)     | (0.11)     | (0.13)     | (0.14)     |
| Length                    | 0.0007     | 0.0003     | 0.004      | 0.002      |
|                           | (0.003)    | (0.004)    | (0.006)    | (0.006)    |
| Cum sea                   | - 0.023    | - 0.02     | - 0.03     | - 0.02     |
|                           | (0.03)     | (0.035)    | (0.03)     | (0.035)    |
| Complement                | -          | -          | - 0.004    | - 0.004*   |
|                           |            |            | (0.002)    | (0.0023)   |
| Officers                  | - 0.049    | - 0.048    | - 0.027    | - 0.20     |
|                           | (0.037)    | (0.04)     | (0.04)     | (0.04)     |
| Engineers                 | - 0.245*** | - 0.233*** | - 0.190*** | - 0.178*** |
|                           | (0.049)    | (0.050)    | (0.055)    | (0.059)    |
| Observations              | 746        | 746        | 552        | 552        |
| Number of vessels         | 118        | 118        | 88         | 88         |
| Overall R 2               | 0.84       | 084        | 0.84       | 0.84       |
| Year effects              | Yes        | Yes        | Yes        | Yes        |
| Age*cohort interactions   | No         | Yes        | No         | Yes        |

Random effects included for all regressions (FGLS)

Bootstrap standard errors shown in parentheses, with *** p \ 0.01, ** p \ 0.05, * p \ 0.1

series. Nevertheless, we are able to link officers with their Academy profiles for the majority of our sample.

The final match-merged data include the personnel, personnel attributes, status, and characteristics of every active U.S. naval vessel from 1870 to 1911. This span of time generates a wide range of steam vessel-types and enables us to track factors linked to very different technologically embodied ships; technological proxies include the age of the vessel, its size in terms of displacement, and its speed (the age profiles of all active vessels are illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2). 26 At the same time, our study deals both in the pre-amalgamation age (so that we analyze two distinct skilltypes) and the post-amalgamation age (where such distinctions were at least de jure done away with). Descriptive statistics for ship characteristics of vessels active in naval power projection (out at sea) appear in Table 1.

Finally, we include year effects for all regressions. These conceivably important controls reduce bias from the omission of time-specific factors such as changes to

Table 7 Maximum steam engineering percentile on ship characteristics (1870-1911)

| Variables                 | (1)               | (2)                | (3)                     | (4)                      |
|---------------------------|-------------------|--------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|
| Vessel age                | - 0.008***        | - 0.012***         | - 0.007**               | - 0.010***               |
| Vessel speed (knots)      | (0.003) -         | (0.004) -          | (0.003) 0.038** (0.019) | (0.0036) 0.045*** (0.01) |
| Displacement (1,000 tons) | 0.00015*          | 0.007              | 0.010                   | 0.010                    |
| Length (feet)             | (0.009)           | (0.010)            | (0.010) 0.0006          | (0.010)                  |
|                           | 0.0014** (0.0006) | 0.0015*** (0.0005) | (0.0007)                | 0.0005 (0.0007)          |
| Officers                  | 0.022***          | 0.020***           | 0.023***                | 0.020***                 |
|                           | (0.007)           | (0.007)            | (0.008)                 | (0.008)                  |
| Engineers                 | - 0.0045          | - 0.005            | - 0.009                 | - 0.010                  |
| Observations              | (0.008)           | (0.008)            | (0.008)                 | (0.009)                  |
|                           | 1,212             | 1,212              | 1,094                   | 1,094                    |
| No. of vessels            | 205               | 205                | 188                     | 188                      |
| 2                         |                   |                    |                         |                          |
| Overall R                 | 0.24              | 0.25               | 0.26                    | 0.28                     |
| Year effects              | Yes               | Yes                | Yes                     | Yes                      |

Random effects included for all regressions (FGLS)

All specifications include squared regressors (not shown)

Standard errors shown in parentheses, bootstrap estimators

*** p \ 0.01, ** p \ 0.05, * p \ 0.1

naval budgets, variations in aggregate naval personnel, and shifts in strategy and international relations. 27

## 5 Results

## 5.1 Engineer and officer assignments

Our first empirical exercise regresses the concentrations of engineer personnel or line officers aboard active vessels on vessel characteristics including variables controlling for size, age, personnel measures, and sea experience. For these, we use Poisson regressions, since dependent variables are count variables with nearly equal mean and variance. 28 The count profiles of both engineers and officers aboard active vessels are illustrated in Fig. 3, while descriptive statistics for variables included in all regressions appear in Table 1. Many ship characteristic variables are not timedependent-these include measures of displacement (in thousand tons), length (in

Table 8 Maximum first-year percentile on ship characteristics (1870-1911)

| Variables                            | (1)             | (2)             | (3)               | (4)              |
|--------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-------------------|------------------|
| Vessel age                           | - 0.002         | - 0.020***      | 0.002             | - 0.013          |
|                                      | (0.002)         | (0.007)         | (0.002)           | (0.007)          |
| Vessel speed (knots)                 | -               | -               | 0.055*** (0.020)  | 0.059*** (0.018) |
| Displacement (1,000 tons)            | - 0.002         | 0.006           | 0.005             | 0.014            |
|                                      | (0.011)         | (0.011)         | (0.011)           | (0.011) - 0.0005 |
| Length (feet)                        | 0.0008 (0.0006) | 0.0007 (0.0006) | - 0.0003 (0.0007) | (0.0007)         |
| Officers                             | 0.024***        | 0.020***        | 0.021***          | 0.015**          |
|                                      | (0.007)         | (0.008)         | (0.007)           | (0.007)          |
| Engineers                            | 0.009           | 0.014*          | 0.0005            | 0.006            |
|                                      | (0.008)         | (0.008)         | (0.008)           | (0.008)          |
| Observations                         | 1216            | 1216            | 1098              | 1098             |
| No. of vessels                       | 205             | 205             | 188               | 188              |
| 2                                    |                 |                 |                   | 0.29             |
| Overall R                            | 0.24            | 0.28            | 0.26              | Yes              |
| Tear effects Age*cohort interactions | Yes No          | Yes Yes         | Yes No            | Yes              |

Random effects included for all regressions (FGLS)

All specifications include squared regressors (not shown)

Standard errors shown in parentheses, bootstrap estimators

*** p \ 0.01, ** p \ 0.05, * p \ 0.1

feet), and complement (the total number of ship personnel as recorded in the Dictionary of Fighting Ships ). Variables that evolve over time include the age of the vessel, the cumulative number of years since 1870 that the ship has been active at sea (''cumulative sea''), and the number of naval officers assigned to the vessel. 29 Some specifications (indicated on each table) include cohort interactions, which are combinations of vessel ages and year dummy variables. These essentially capture and control for the vintage of ships. For example, a 5-year-old ship observed in 1880 likely has less advanced technology than a 5-year-old ship observed in 1885. Finally, given the heterogeneity in our sample of vessels (e.g., some ships as small as 70-feet long, with others over 500-feet long), we control for additional nonlinearities in technology using quadratic regressors. These allow us to capture points at which expanding demand for skilled labor on vessels begin to level-off.

Table 2 presents results for engineer counts serving on active ships at sea, the estimates of which derive from the empirical methodology outlined in Sect. 3.1. We include results for specifications with both ship random effects and ship fixed effects. The first four specifications show the relationships between numbers of engineers assigned to active vessels and vessel-specific characteristics for the

## Age of all active vessels across all years (years)

Displacementof all active vessels across all years (thousand tons)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 1 Age and displacement profiles of active vessels

<!-- image -->

pre-Amalgamated era. The latter four specifications demonstrate these relationships for the first decade of the post-Amalgamated era.

The pre-Amalgamation era witnessed strong capitaland technology-skill complementarities for engineer personnel, as proxied by displacement and vessel age, respectively. Using vessel age in this way is defensible on the basis of the historiography of the navy-technological progress happened in fits and starts, but it also happened chronologically . Thus, the year of a ship's construction might give us a sense of the technological vintage of the vessel. 30

## Complementof all active vessels across all years (number)

Speed of all active vessels across all years (knots)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Complement and speed profiles on active vessels

<!-- image -->

We also include age-cohort interaction effects. From Fig. 4 (which base results from column (3) in Table 2), we see that regardless of their vintage, older ships always require fewer engineers than newer ships (a negatively sloped function). That is, 5-year-old vessels in 1884 require more engineers than 10-year-old vessels in 1884, and 5-year-old vessels in 1899 requires more engineers than 10-year-old vessels in 1899. A clear pattern emerges-older ships had fewer engineers in any given year. 31

## Numbers of engineers aboard active vessels across all year

<!-- image -->

Number of officers aboard active vessels across all years

Fig. 3 Numbers of skilled labor on active vessels

<!-- image -->

Further, we observe robust positive effects on engineer numbers from the size of ships. Larger and heavier ships clearly demanded more engineers on active vessels, controlling for other aspects of ship size such as the number of officers or the ship's complement. As we mentioned, displacement serves as a good technological proxy since larger vessels demanded more sophisticated technological systems (Bennett 1896).

We also observe a strong inter-skill complementarity-the number of officers aboard the vessel is closely associated with the number of engineers. These estimates are clearly endogenous, since officers and engineers were likely simultaneously assigned. Still, it is informative to see the complementary nature of these two officer groups.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 Vintage effects over time-predicted number of engineers (vertical axis)

<!-- image -->

Finally, the typical complement on a ship appears to have no relationship with the assigned number of engineers. This suggests two things. First, it provides a fortiori evidence of capital-engineering skill complementarities, as greater numbers of engineers are associated with larger ships even controlling for overall size of labor. Thus, we are not merely capturing a scale effect. Second, it suggests no engineer-unskilled labor complementarities.

But comparing these estimates with those displayed in the latter four columns, differences in results between preand post-amalgamation are striking. Simply, those with engineering backgrounds and training appear to change into entirely different workers. No longer is there any association between the displacement of a vessel and the number of engineers. Rather, there is now a strong relationship between the complement of the ship and its engineer-oriented crew. Scale still matters, but here it appears to operate through unskilled labor rather than capital.

What about technology? Even without including a measure for speed (which remains insignificant-results not shown), there is no evidence that suggests that newer vessels were linked to more engineers after 1899. That is true whether we do or do not include age-cohort effects. Finally, there are no longer any discernible officer-engineer complementarities when including complement.

An important question is whether the Amalgamation Act forced the labor reallocation, or if reallocation occurred in anticipation of the Act. Table 3 provides us another way to demonstrate the changing roles of engineering personnel. Here, we use the whole time period and include ship characteristic decade interaction terms. In specification (1), we see that for the whole time period, engineers on average worked on newer and larger vessels. Through decade interactions, however, we see a clear but gradual reversal of these trends. We include complement measures in specifications (3) and (4). Again the changes are clear-we see a positive association with displacement in the 1870s and 80s, but a negative association after 1900, with the reversal taking place in the 1890s. We also see a

negative association with complement in the 1870s and 80s, but a positive association after 1900, again with a reversal clearly occurring in the 90s.

In short, the complementarities between engineers and capital, technology, and other skilled laborers embraced by naval strategists in the earlier era appear changed by the time de jure amalgamation actually takes place. It is clear that the Navy anticipated the change and worked to get engineers in activities previously done by line officers. What is striking here is that the Navy of this latter era was deploying and embracing engineer-oriented technologies to an unprecedented degree. One would imagine that the Great White Fleet would require technocrats to manage and operate complicated machinery and technologies now more than ever. So did the regular officer corps pick up the slack?

Table 4 performs the same exercises as Table 2 but for line officers instead of engineers. Again, we split the sample between pre- and post-amalgamation periods. While there appear to be capital and tech-skill complementarities for officers as well, these completely disappear when we include the complement of ships. The evidence overwhelmingly shows that officers were linked with unskilled personnel, not capital. This makes sense, as officers served a primary role as managers of sailors rather than as direct operators of machinery. This is in stark contrast to the results for engineers before amalgamation.

This relationship remains basically unaltered after amalgamation (besides the fact that engineers no longer complement officers). So while engineers became more like officers, officers did not become more like engineers. As we mentioned earlier, there remained resistance to the Navy's return to omni-competence for its officer corps, as it related more to competence in the engineering focused technologies of the new Navy and not to traditional naval training. The empirical findings suggest that the old engineering corps was transformed more radically than the old officer corps. Concern remained that such an asymmetric amalgamation could produce a reactionary corps unprepared and ill-suited for twentieth century, state-of-the-art naval developments.

So far, the analysis suggests that the Navy embraced labor specialization, but only during the 1870s and 1880s. Amalgamation was motivated by rising communication and coordination costs within the corps, as well as the fear that division within the fleet could stifle technological developments and paralyze naval strategy. But amalgamation generated its own concern that a homogenous corps would be a less technologically savvy one, and this could itself endanger progress. However, while the post-amalgamation Navy was limited in its ability to specialize along the extensive margin of human capital (officer versus engineer), it could perhaps allocate tasks along more intensive margins of human capital and thus could help it continue to operate complex and engineer-oriented technologies. We explore the roles of these intensive measures of human capital on specialization patterns in the following sections.

## 5.2 Personnel experience

Job experience can serve as a proxy for human capital development in a number of ways. One, work experience can produce firm or industry-specific knowledge

accumulation. Two, technological or structural changes within the industry can either augment or erode one's existing level of human capital through work experience over time. If workers receive formal education prior to working, job experience measures may capture the vintage of such education.

We have two different measures of worker job tenure, originating from two separate sources. The first comes from Bennett (1896), which lists the names and start dates of every engineer who served in the Navy, from its inception to 1896. 32 Wematch the data with navy registry information to construct an average experience measure for the longevity of service for engineering personnel assigned to vessels. The second measure documents the average experience of all officers (line and engineer) associated with active vessels; this comes from linking officers listed in navy registers with their Naval Academy profiles (these indicate year of graduation). Thus, the former measure includes all engineers but no line officers, while the latter contains all line and engineer officers but no uncommissioned engineers. Note also that our Naval Academy documentation only goes back to 1865-earlier observations for our second measure will then systematically over-report experience. The inclusion of year effects helps us control for such systematic bias.

Table 5 displays results from FGLS regressions of average engineer experience associated with active vessels on vessel characteristics. 33 Strikingly, older vessels (measured either through age or age-cohort interactions) are associated with more experienced engineers, while more capital-intensive vessels (measured by displacement) are associated with less experienced engineers. This likely captures human capital vintage effects, as earlier trained engineers were likely less familiar with the workings of newer and more advanced vessels. Thus, newer and larger ships were manned by younger and larger groups of engineers, a result that we would expect in an environment with capital- and technology-skill complementarities.

These results are generally echoed when we look at all officers assigned to active vessels (Table 6), although the results are somewhat weaker. Even after controlling for the number of engineers (who tend to be systematically younger than their line officer counterparts), more experienced members of the officer corps tend to be assigned to less capital-intensive vessels.

These findings are only for the 19th century; yet, they do suggest another avenue for the twentieth-century Navy to allocate human capital across its fleet. As the Naval Academy adjusted its curriculum to meet the needs of the modernizing fleet, it stands to reason that newer and less-seasoned personnel would better serve more modern vessels. Such an allocation strategy could mitigate potentially negative effects arising from amalgamation.

## 5.3 Personnel education

Another intensive measure of human capital includes the education officers received while students at the Naval Academy. For the graduating classes of 1865-1905, we

<!-- image -->

document each officer's first-year order of merit (this tends to capture basic proficiency in math, science, and languages) and overall order of merit (over all 4 years), as well as class rank in four specific subjects-steam engineering, seamanship, ordnance and gunnery, and navigation. 34 Dividing rank measures by graduating class size gives us percentile score measures for each officer. We use these percentile scores to produce average human capital measures associated with active vessels, as well as maximum and minimum scores.

Perhaps not surprisingly, we do not get any statistically significant results when we regress average officer education measures on ship characteristics. Each ship crew consisted of a motley mix of officers with varying academic performance scores-averages wash away this heterogeneity. However, regressing the top score obtained by a member of the ship crew on ship characteristics produces some interesting results. The most striking findings are those pertaining to steam engineering (Table 7) and first-year scores (Table 8).

When we consider steam engineering scores, there does appear to be abilitytechnology complementarities. As before, newer vessels are associated with greater engineering skill. This time, however, we measure skill as the skill pertaining to only one individual. Both for pre- and post-amalgamated navies, what appears to matter is not that the entire crew is good at engineering, but rather at least someone is good at engineering. Again this points to further specialization, as those with stellar engineering backgrounds were tasked with the newer aspects of naval operations, other officers could focus on more traditional tasks. Note that, these age effects are quite strong. In contrast to our previous count analysis, vessel age remains negatively related to engineering skill even when we control for age-cohort effects (these are also negative).

Another new feature now is that vessel speed positively predicts engineering skill. Specifically, each knot is associated with around 4 extra percentile points of higher engineering scores for the highest-scoring member of the crew. Further, our age effects remain robust even with the inclusion of speed. The bottom line is that we observe significant technology-skill (but no capital-skill) complementarities when we focus on the officer with the highest demonstrated ability in steam engineering. 35

What about other subject areas? Here, the results are notably weaker or nonexistent. Tellingly, steam engineering skills appear to be the most important skill for a crew member to be linked up with more advanced ship technology. 36 That includes our percentile scores for overall order of merit. However, as demonstrated in Table 8, maximum first-year percentile scores are also positively related technological proxies. During this time (and even today), first-year classes at the Naval Academy were devoted almost entirely to basic subjects (math, history, English), and virtually no course focused on navy-specific material. This may

suggest that first-year scores proxy for basic or general knowledge (as opposed to navy-specific knowledge), and one who has such knowledge may benefit the crew of a technologically sophisticated vessel more than anyone with traditional naval skills.

Again, the results suggest that the Navy was able to match skills with capital and technologies with more subtlety than just through the extensive margin of matching officers with some tasks and engineers with others. The lesson is that an organization can still, and probably should, embrace a certain degree of specialization, even as it attempts to homogenize its workshop. 37 As amalgamation obscured and ultimately obliterated the distinction between line and engineer officers, the Navy had the ability to compensate by matching through more hidden intensive human capital measures like education and experience.

## 6 Conclusion

As the nation proceeded through the second Industrial Revolution, naval vessels became increasingly more technical. The most advanced vessels (faster, heavier, and newer) required larger shares of technically proficient workers for operation. Skilled workers were highly specialized at first, and the Navy of the 1870s and 80s was one where complementarities abounded.

Yet, in the early twentieth century, when engineer-oriented technologies were being rapidly developed and implemented, we observe far less labor specialization. This was because the efficiency gains that typically arise from specialization did not appear to outweigh the large communication and coordination costs associated with a divided corps. The Navy was able to manage the transition by (1) phasing-in the change, (2) shaping and controlling the curriculum that officers learned at the Naval Academy before joining, and (3) allowing for specialization along intensive margins of skills and experience.

How did naval ''production'' fare with all these technological and personnel changes? Very well, we would argue. Based on measures of power projection (vessels launched in various naval fronts) and durations of voyages, the Navy of the nineteen-aughts was far superior to any of its nineteenth-century predecessors. 38 Of course, many other factors were changing simultaneously, including naval policy and the world tour of the Great White Fleet. But the balance of evidence suggests that naval productivity went beyond greater naval spending or policy changes alone. In this sense, labor amalgamation can be deemed a success.

The U.S. Navy today remains committed to the model of the omni-competent naval officer, employing policies such as the ''division officer shuffle'' where officer reassignments occur frequently to produce well-rounded sailors. This paper studies the antecedents of our current military paradigm. Yet, the study also offers historical lessons on the dynamics of change pertinent to non-military societies as well. Studying the tradeoffs of labor specialization, and how organizations restructure when technologies change, should be valuable for businesses of all kinds.

## References

| Acemoglu D (2007) Equilibrium bias of technology. Econometrica 75(5):1371-1409                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Allen JM (1976) Corporate values invade the navy: the growth of modern American sea power 1861-1882. Dissertation, Syracuse University                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Autor DH (2001) Wiring the labor market. J Econ Perspect 15(1):25-40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Bennett FM (1896) The steam navy of the United States-a history of the growth of the steam vessel of war in the navy, and of the naval engineer corps. Warren and Co. Publishers, Pittsburgh PA Blank DM, Stigler GJ (1957) 'The demand and supply of scientific personnel. No. 62 General Series:                |
| Borghans L, ter Weel B (2006) The division of labour, worker organization, and technological change. Econ J 116(509):F45-F72 Buhl LC (1978) Maintaining an American Navy, 1865-1889. In: Hagan KJ (ed) Peace and war: interpretations of American naval history-30th anniversary edition (2008). Praeger Security |
| Chin A, Juhn C, Thompson P (2006) Technical change and the demand for skills during the second industrial revolution: evidence from the merchant marine, 1891-1912. Rev Econ Stat 88(3):572-578 Calvert Monte A (1967) The mechanical engineer in America, 1830-1910: professional cultures in                    |
| conflict. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Coletta PE (1987) A survey of U.S. naval affairs, 1865-1917. Scarecrow Press, Lanham, MD Davis LE, Engerman SL (2006) Naval blockades in peace and war: an economic history since 1750.                                                                                                                           |
| Glaser DJ, Rahman AS (2011) Human capital and technological transition-insights from the U.S. navy. J Econ Hist 71(3):704-729 innovation.                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Glaser DJ, Rahman AS (2012) 'Returns to skill in an era of rapid technological USNA                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Goldin C, Katz LF (1998) The origins of technology-skill complementarity. Quart J Econ 113(3):693-732                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Hackemer K (2001) The U.S. navy and the origins of the military-industrial complex, 1847-1883. Naval                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Institute Press, Annapolis, MD Hadfield GK (1999) A coordination model of the sexual division of labor. J Econ Behav Organ                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Houthakker H (1956) Economics and biology: specialization and speciation. Kyklos 9:181-189                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Karsten Peter M (1972) The naval aristocracy: the golden age of Annapolis and the emergence of modern American navalism. First Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, MD Kim S (1989) Labor specialization and the extent of the market. J Polit Econ 97:692-705                                                       |
| Kim S, Mohtadi H (1992) Labor specialization and endogenous growth. Am Econ Rev 82(2):404-408                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Kremer M (1993) The O-ring theory of economic development. Quart J Econ 108(3):551-575                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Lipsey R, Bekar C, Carlaw K (1998) General purpose technologies: what requires explanation? In: Helpman E (ed) General purpose technologies and economic growth. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA                                                                                                                         |
| McBride WM (1992) Strategic determinism in technology selection: the electric battleship and US naval- industrial relations. Technol Cult 33:248-277 McBride WM (2000) Technological change and the United States 1865-1945. John Hopkins                                                                         |
| navy, University Press, London Modelski G, Thompson WR (1988) Seapower in global politics, 1494-1993. University of Washington                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Mokyr J (2002) The gifts of Athena. Oxford University Press, New York

Mokyr J, The American Council of Learned Societies (1990) The lever of riches. Oxford University Press, New York

Paret P (1989) In: Paret P (ed) Makers of modern strategy: from machiavelli to the nuclear age. Princeton University Press, Priceton, NJ

Reinhart CM, Rogoff Kenneth S (2009) This time is different: eight centuries of financial folly. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ

Rosenberg N, Trajtenberg M (2004) A general purpose technology at work: the corliss steam engine in the late 19th-century U.S. J Econ Hist 64(1):61-99

Smith E (1938) A short history of naval and marine engineering. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK

Sternad D (2011) Strategic adaptation: cross-cultural differences in company responses to an economic crisis. Springer, Wien

Tomblin BB (1988) From sail to steam: the development of steam technology in the United States navy, 1838-1865. New Rutgers University, Brunswick

Vlahos ME (1989) The making of an American style. In: King RW (ed) Naval engineering and American sea power. The Nautical and Aviation Publishing Company of America Inc, Baltimore

Wooldridge JM (2002) Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA

Zollo M, Winter SG (2002) Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities. Organ Sci 13(3):339-351