## Labor for  the Picking:  The New Deal in the South

WARREN  C.  WHATLEY

During  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s  southern  landlords  began  to  replace sharetenants and mules with wage laborers and large-scale preharvest  machinery. Informed  observers in the  1920s did not expect this to happen until the advent of the mechanical cotton picker, which came after World War I. This paper presents evidence  supporting  the  claim  that  the  AAA  policies  of  the 1930s,  and  the economic  depression  they  were  designed  to  cure,  induced  this tenant  displacement by increasing the asset value of land rights without securing tenants a share right,  and  by  relaxing  the  harvest  labor  constraint  that  had  previously  impeded mechanization.

## THE  VIEW  FROM THE  1920S

C ONTEMPORARY  observers  of pre-Depression  southern  plantation  agriculture  often pointed  out  that  the  highly  seasonal  and uncertain  amounts  of  labor  required  in  cotton  production  made  the assurance  of an adequate  supply  of cheap  harvest  labor  a major  cost consideration  for any net revenue-maximizing  landlord.   In fact,  this 1 concern has been one of the traditional factors relied upon to explain the persistent use of the sharecrop contract; once a sharecrop or sharetenant contract  was secured  (where a household  was paid with a share of the crop  value  at  the  end  of  the  season)  the  availability of  the household's  labor  for the downstream  harvest  was relatively  certain. Within  the transactions  costs  framework  this  consideration  of  downstream  labor  supply  is  called  the  enforcement  cost  of annual wage

Journal  of  Economic  History, Vol. XLHI,  No. 4  (Dec. 1983).  ' The  Economic  History Association. All rights reserved.  ISSN 0022-0507.

The author is Assistant Professor of Economics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.  He wishes  to  thank  Paul  David,  Donald  Harris,  Glenn  Loury,  and Gavin  Wright  for extensive comments on an earlier draft.  He also wishes to thank the participants of the Economic History/CCHROME  Workshop at the University of Michigan, the 1982 Cliometrics  Conference, the  1982 Social  Science  Historians  Association  Conference,  and the editors and referees  of this JOURNAL.

1 For  a  representative sample  of  these accounts  see  The  United  States Department  of Agriculture, Plantation Organization and Operation in the  Yazoo-Mississippi Delta Area, Technical  Bulletin  no.  1269 (Oct.  1924);  Mississippi  Agricultural  Experimental  Station, The Cotton Plantation  in  Transition, Bulletin  no. 508 (Jan.  1954);  Mississippi  Agricultural Experimental Station, The Plantation Land  Tenure System  in Mississippi, Bulletin no. 385 (June  1943); USDA, Utilization and Cost of Power on Mississippi and Arkansas Plantations, Technical Bulletin no. 497 (Dec.  1935); Mississippi Agricultural  Experimental Station, Farm Power in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, Bulletin  no. 295 (Nov.  1931); and the National  Research  Project, Changes in Technology and Labor Requirements in Crop Production: Cotton, Report  no. A-7 (Philadelphia,  Sept.  1938).

contracts.  In the risk-sharing framework,  which assumes zero enforce2 ment  costs,  this  consideration  emanates  from  wage  uncertainty  in  the casual labor  market,  The two approaches arrive at identical  analytical 3 results:  sharetenancy  as  a  cost-efficient way  to  secure  a  stream  of annual  labor  inputs.

Yet,  when  the  discussion  turns  to  the  introduction  of  labor-saving production  techniques  into  preharvest  operations  (for  example,  the adoption  of  the  tractor  and  various  multi-mule  techniques),  this  same institutional arrangement  is  sometimes  indicted  for  impeding  "progress."  This indictment argues that because alternative local part-time 4 wage employment  was  scarce  tenants  had  little  incentive  to adopt  the tractor. Likewise, if the landlord mechanized the preharvest and charged the tenant for the machine's services, the tenant would experience a diminution in income and would be induced to move away, leaving the harvest unattended and the landlord dependent on uncertain downstream  labor  market  conditions.  Consequently,  the  demand  for tractor services was  confined to the  portion  of  the  plantation the landlord planned to cultivate with wage or "casual" labor. In this wage system  the  landlord  was  once  again  confronted  with  the  problem  of uncertain harvest labor. This uncertainty entered into the formulation of the  expected  cost  of gathering downstream  harvest  labor and was of a magnitude that effectively  restricted  both the scale of production  in the wage system  and  the demand for  the new large-scale  technology. 5

Lee  Alston  has  presented  the  most  convincing  data  on  the  inverse relationship  between  mechanization  and  sharetenancy,  but  gives  it  a different  interpretation.   Operating  within  a  transactions  costs  frame6 work,  he  argues  that  landlords  were  free  first  to  decide  on  the  wealth maximizing  crops  and  inputs,  and  then  to  choose  the  set  of  labor contracts  that  best  utilized  the  relatively  fixed  amount  of  supervisory capacity.  From  this perspective  sharetenancy  did not impede technical

- 2 Lee J. Alston, "Tenure Choice in Southern Agriculture,  1930-1960," Explorations in Economic History, 18 (July  1981), 211-32; LeeJ.  Alston and Robert Higgs, "Contractual  Mix in Southern Agriculture  since  the  Civil  War:  Facts, Hypotheses,  and  Tests,"  this  JOURNAL,  42 (June  1982), 337-38.
- 3 David Newbery,  "Risk Sharing and Uncertain  Labor Markets," Review of Economic Studies, 44  (Sept.  1977),  585-94;  David  Newbery  and  J.  E.  Stiglitz,  "Sharecropping,  Risk  Sharing  and Imperfect  Information,"  in James A. Roumasset, et al. (eds.), Risk,  Uncertainty and Agricultural Development (SEARCH-ADA  Publication,  1980), pp. 311-39.
- 4 For example see James H. Street, The  New Revolution in the Cotton Economy: Mechanization and its Consequences (Chapel  Hill,  1957), pp. 34,  106; Jay  Mandle, The Roots of Black Poverty: The Southern Plantation Economy After the Civil War (Durham, 1978), pp. 52-70; Harold Pederson and  Arthur  Raper, The  Cotton  Plantation in  Transition, Mississippi  Agricultural  Experimental Station, Bulletin No. 508 (Jan.  1954); and Heywood Fleisig, "Mechanization of the Cotton Harvest in the  19th Century  South,"  this JOURNAL,  25 (Dec.  1965), 704-06.
- 5 These  issues  receive  more detailed theoretical,  historical, and  empirical  treatment  in Warren Whatley, Institutional Change  and  Mechanization  in  the  Cotton  South, unpublished  Ph.D. dissertation  (Palo Alto,  1983).
- 6 Alston,  "Tenure  Choice," p. 219.

progress. On the contrary, "exogenous" technical progress reduced the attractiveness  of  sharetenancy  by  reducing  the  amount  of  required supervision.

The crucial assumptions  of this approach  (the relative inelasticity of the supply of supervision and the independence of decisions over inputs and  crops  on the  one hand  and  labor  contracts  on the other)  have  not been empirically grounded.  Why was it more cost efficient  for  laborers to supply their own supervision than for landlords to supervise  supervisors?  There  was  no  shortage  of  supervision  in  the  antebellum  Slave South, and the demand was greatest then. And why should we view the decisions  about  crops  and  inputs  as  independent  of,  and  prior  to,  the decision about labor contracts? Mechanization, for example, required a production  scale of almost  100 acres  before  becoming  the most  profitable  technique.   It  also  increased  the  enforcement  cost  of  the  annual 7 labor flow by increasing its seasonality and dependence on the uncertain downstream  labor  market.  But  high  enforcement  costs  and  uncertain labor markets made sharetenancy  attractive, which in turn reduced  the scale of wage production. It is obvious that the choice of inputs  affected the choice of labor contracts. What Alston overlooked  was the  impact of the choice of labor contracts on the choice of inputs, which  operated through  the  scale of production  and  the  profitability  of  mechanization. (A  similar  simultaneity  applies  to  the  choice  of  crops:  Planting  more cotton  increased  the  seasonality  of  labor  inputs  and  dependence  on uncertain downstream labor contracts, which made sharetenancy  more attractive and reduced both the scale of production and the  profitability of  mechanization.)

The  following  passage,  taken  from  a  1931  Mississippi  Agricultural Experimental Station report, is typical of the period and presents a vivid picture of the  scope of this  harvest  labor  market  and  how  it  restricted both the size of the wage system and the extent of preharvest  mechanization:

The greater part of the mule cotton  crop was picked  by those who had produced  it as share hands, but cotton produced  with tractor power and some wage cotton produced with mules was hoed, chopped,  and picked  with hired labor. This hired  labor  may  be grouped into four general classes. The first class consists of sharecroppers living on the place who may be hired when not busy on their own crop. Practically all hired hoe labor was  of  this  type.  This  class  of  labor  is  the  most  satisfactory,  but  the  quantity  was limited. Negro  labor  from surrounding  towns  and  cities is perhaps  the next in importance. These laborers had  to be hauled daily. Competition for  their services had made them  independent  and,  as a class,  they  were  reported  as  not  very  dependable. Negroes  brought  in  from  outside  the  Delta  constitute  a  third  class.  They  must  be recruited  and assembled on the place, but, as a rule, they return to their homes at their own expense ... .  The fourth  class of such labor is that composed of Mexicans brought in  from  southern  Texas.  They  give  good  service  and  stay  to  the  finish.  They  are ordinarily  transported  from  their  homes  and  returned,  the cost  of  such  transportation

TABLE 1 PERCENT DISTRIBUTION  OF CROPLAND HARVESTED BY TENURE: DELTA, 1930 AND 1940

| Tenure           |   1930 | 1940   |
|------------------|--------|--------|
| Owned or Managed |   18.1 | 41.8   |
| Owned            |   13.4 | 32.9   |
| Managed          |    4.7 | 8.8    |
| Tenant           |   81.9 | 58.2   |
| Cash             |   10.6 | 8.2    |
| Share            |   24.5 | '      |
| Cropper          |   46.8 | '      |

Source:  U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 15th Census ofAgriculture , 1930, Vol. II, pt. 2 and 16th Census of Agriculture, 1940, Vol. I, pts. 3,  4.

entered  into the cost of cotton picking. Up to the time of the study, no scarcity of this type has been encountered, but it is not known just  how much could be depended upon at  a given wage.

Picking  is  at  present the factor  which limits  the production  of  cotton  with tractor power. Certainly there is a limit to the amount which can be profitably picked with hired hand  labor. On  the  other  hand,  improvements  are  constantly  being  made  in  the mechanical  cotton  pickers,  and  when  these  become  successful  they  will,  no  doubt, revolutionize  cotton  production  (emphasis added). 8

It  appears  that  prior  to the Great  Depression  of the 1930s the most informed  observers of southern agriculture were convinced that expansion of the wage system of cultivation and the fuller  utilization of largescale production methods had to await the arrival of the revolutionizing cotton picker, which did not make its debut until  1942. Yet despite this pessimistic view from the 1920s, evidence from  the Delta South reveals a  startling  reallocation  of cropland  from  the tenant  system to the wage system before U.S. involvement in World War II, and this antedates the technological  revolution  in cotton  picking.   Table  1 shows  that  the 9

8 Farm  Power  in the  Mississippi  Delta, pp. 28-29.  For similar  statements  see  USDA, The Relation of Tenure to Plantation  Organization, Department  Bulletin  no.  1269 (Oct.  1924), p.  26; USDA, Plantation  Organization and Operation in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta Area, pp. 59-60. For a theoretical and empirical analysis of the same phenomena in Indian Agriculture, see Pranab K.  Bardhan,  "Wages  and  Unemployment  in  a  Poor  Agrarian  Economy:  A Theoretical  and Empirical  Analysis," Journal  of Political Economy, 87 (June  1979).

9 Throughout this paper the "Delta" refers to 23 counties in the states of Mississippi, Arkansas, and Louisiana, all of which are completely within the First River Bottom section of the Mississippi River Basin. There are several reasons for choosing the Delta. The present study is concerned with the allocation of land on the southern plantation, but the most extensive data is available only at the county  level  of  disaggregation.  Fortunately  most  of  the  improved  acreage  in  the  Delta was plantation, and most of the tenancies and "large farms"  were parts of plantations. Consequently, by concentrating on the Delta region one can avoid the confusion  that would have otherwise been introduced  in  other  regions  by the  presence  of  varying  mixtures  of  plantation  and  significant numbers of non-plantation  farming  units within the county  level  aggregates. The counties are (1) Mississippi:  Bolivar,  Coahoma,  Humphreys,  Issaguena,  LeFlore, Quitmen,  Sharkey,  Sunflower, Tallahachie, Tunica, and Washington; (2) Arkansas: Chicot, Crittenden,  Desha, Mississippi, and Phillips; (3) Louisiana:  E. Carroll,  Franklin,  Madison,  Morehouse,  Richland,  Tensas, and West Carol.

TABLE  2 AVERAGE SIZE OF CROPLAND HARVESTED PER FARM, BY TENURE: DELTA, 1930 AND 1940

| Tenure           |   1930 | 1940   |
|------------------|--------|--------|
| Owned or Managed |   49.6 | 87.6   |
| Owned            |   39.2 | 71.6   |
| Managed          |  168.6 | 377.7  |
| Tenant           |   18.8 | 19.4   |
| Cash             |   29.2 | 46.4   |
| Share            |   17.8 |        |
| Cropper          |   16.4 |        |

Source:  See Table 1.

percent of cropland found  in tenant  systems declined from 81.9 percent in  1930 to  58.2  percent  in  1940, whereas  the  percentage  in  owned  or managed  farms (read wage  systems) increased from 18.1  to 41.8 percent.  Most  of this increase  reflects  a growth  in the absolute  size of wage systems, rather than a mass progression of former croppers up the tenure  ladder,  from  tenancy  to  land  ownership.  As  may  be  seen  from Table 2 the average  size of owned  farms  increased  from  39.2 acres  to over 71 acres, and  that  of a managed farm jumped from  168.6 to 377.7 acres.

Apparently  the effects  of  the  harvest  labor  constraint  on  the  size of the wage system had been weakened during this period without the aid of the mechanical cotton picker. What, then, happened during the Great Depression? What new developments (of a kind completely  unforeseen by the most astute observers in the late  1920s) proved powerful  enough to erode the foundations  of the old tenant plantation system, which had seemed anchored  in the unchanging technology  of the cotton  harvest?

There are two candidates. On May  12, 1933, the Agricultural  Adjustment Act (AAA) was  signed  into law as the agricultural  section of  the New Deal recovery policy. It has long been conjectured  that the Cotton Plans provided the incentive and the means for both a contraction in the amount of cotton produced and a mass displacement of tenants from the plantation  premises. 10 These  displaced  tenants,  in  turn,  flooded  the harvest labor market, reduced  the cost and difficulty  of gathering labor downstream,  and permitted  the further  expansion  of the wage  system. Once the wage system had more room to expand, large-scale methods of production could feasibly  enter  the  preharvest  operations.

10 See,  for  example,  Fred  C.  Frey  and  T.  Lynn  Smith,  "The  Influence  of  the  AAA  Cotton Program  Upon the Tenant,  Cropper and Laborer," Rural Sociology, 1 (Dec.  1936); Wilson Gee, "Acreage Reduction and the Displacement of Farm Labor," Agricultural History, 17 (Aug. 1935); and David Wayne Ganger, The Impact  of Mechanization and the New Deal's Acreage  Reduction Programs on Cotton Farmers During the  1930s, unpublished  Ph.D.  dissertation  (University  of California  at Los Angeles, 1973).

The  second candidate is  price movements.  Even  without  AAA payments  and  cotton  acreage  controls,  price  movements  during  the Depression  could  have  induced  a reallocation  of land  out  of  tenancies and  into large-scale  wage  systems of  production.

The remainder of this paper will attempt to ascertain and measure the relative  impact  of  these  two  factors  on  the  allocation  of  improved acreage on Delta plantations during the  1930s.

## THE  COMING OF A NEW  DEAL

When the 72nd Congress met for  its closing  session  in December of 1932, the  election  had  guaranteed  a change  of administration.  Agricultural  interests  began  pressing  for  passage  of  the  Jones  Bill, a  national proposal designed  to control production.  A compromise, it accordingly won support from a vast array of farm interests. As part of the National Emergency  Act  it  stated  that agricultural  recovery  was imperative  for the economic  recovery of  the nation as a whole  and encouraged Congress  to  act  and  plan  policies  designed  to  restore  the  1909-1914 parity position  of the farming  sector.

The Jones  Bill was not accepted by the lame-duck  Congress, but the special  session  of  the  new  Congress  of  the  Roosevelt  Administration was presented with an Administration Bill on March  16th which embodied many of its features. After much tinkering this bill was enacted on May 12, 1933  as  the  Agricultural  Adjustment  Act  (AAA),  an  omnibus  measure which  authorized  the  Federal  Government  to  use  production  restraints, distribute  benefit  payments,  and  set  various  kinds  of  marketing  agreements  to  enhance  farm  income.  The  Federal  Government  had  been assigned the task of actively intervening in American agriculture with the expressed goal of helping farmers  achieve  "parity." 11

The  first  task  was  to  improve  farm  income,  but  in  a  manner  that would  also  reduce  the  accumulated  world  stockpiles  of  agricultural commodities.  The  program  decided  upon  entailed  the  distribution  of benefit  payments  in  a  way  that  would  encourage  farmers  to  restrain production. In the South, each farmer willing to participate was to make a  contract  offer  to rent  a prescribed  percentage  of his base-year  cotton acreage  (1928-1932)  to  the  Secretary  of Agriculture.  For  the  one-year term  of  the  contract  the  Secretary  could  dispose  of  the  land  as  he  so chose, and he chose not to produce cotton. In return, the farmer was to

11 Legally there  were two AAAs. The first was administered under the Act of 1933 and covered the  plow-up and  the  1934-1935 contracts. The Supreme Court invalidated  this Act on January 6, 1936, by ruling that it unconstitutionally invaded certain rights reserved for states. Less than seven weeks later, however, Congress passed the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act which, in  practice,  was  basically  the  same  as the  AAA  except  it  was  a  permanent  policy  and  rental payments were now called soil-building payments.

receive  a  per  acre  rental  payment  from  the  government.  These  payments  were  to  be  drawn  from a special  excise  tax  levied  on  the commodity  at  the  first processing stage after ginning. It was  the understanding of the Agricultural Adjustment  Administration that "consumers  and  processors  would  thereby  be  made  to  pay  'fair  exchange value' for that part of the product that was currently  consumed  instead of the abnormally low price which had been brought about by the piling up  of  inordinate  stocks  due  to  the  farmer's inability to  check  his operations and  keep in step with the declining effective  demand." 12

After  giving farmers  adequate emergency income relief and  transferring the burden  of the existing  stockpile  of unsold  cotton  "back  to the market"  through  adjusted  production  and  a  restored  price  level,  the emergency task  of the AAA would  have been accomplished.  It  would then have been  incumbent  on the  President  to enact  Section  13 of  the Act,  which  provided  for  its  termination  whenever  "the  national  economic  emergency  in  relation  to  agriculture  had  been  ended." 13 The Agricultural  Adjustment  Administration  quickly  discovered,  however, that once the carryover was reduced to normal, and production controls were relaxed,  output  would  again expand  beyond  the level  that  would bring a  "fair  exchange  value"  to  farmers.

The  reasons  that  the  Cotton  South  was  unable  to  return  to  its  preWorld War I parity position are not difficult  to identify.  Henry  Schultz's estimation of the demand for American cotton shows that it had become increasingly  inelastic  since  the  turn  of  the  century. 14 Planners  at  the AAA were well aware of this and thus anticipated great success for their programs  in  the  Cotton  South. 15 If  elasticity  had  been  declining  since 1914, they  reasoned,  then  the  1914 parity  price  would  be less than  the 1933  monopoly price. The  use  of  production controls that would encourage  the  entire  industry  to  cut  back  production  would  generate increased  income for  the industry,  reduce the domestic carryover,  and release  resources  for  use  in other  noncontrolled  industries.

But  another,  more  sobering  result  of  Schultz's  demand  estimations points  to  a  crucial  flaw  in  the  otherwise  informed  views  at  the  AAA. According  to  his  estimates,  the  demand  for  American  cotton  had  not only become more inelastic but had also begun to shift  downward  after World  War  I. 16 In  1938 Schultz  warned  of  the  probable  effect  of  this

- 12 Edwin J. Nourse, Joseph Davis, and John Black, Three Years of the Agricultural Adjustment Ad (Washington,  D.C.,  1937), p. 23.
- 13 Ibid., p.18.
- 14 Henry Schultz, The Theory and Measurement  of Demand (Chicago,  1938), pp. 285-332. He estimates an elasticity of 0.51 for the period  1875-1895, 0.25 for the period  1896-1913, and 0.12 for 1914-1929.
- 15 Ibid.,  p.  323.  Also  see  Mordecai  Ezekiel  and  Louis  H.  Bean, Economic  Bases for  the Agricultural Adjustment  Act (Washington,  D.C., 1933).

overlooked  trend  on the  outcome of the Cotton  Plan:

. . . if the downward  shift  of the per capita domestic demand curve does not come to a stop in the near future, then all such plans for restriction of output as were sponsored by the AAA will give only temporary relief, for it will be a matter of only a few years before the downward  shift  of the curve will counteract  the gain obtained  from  the creation of artificial  scarcity. 17

Schultz  went  on  to  note  that  the  future of  the  American  cotton industry  looked very bleak. Since  World  War  I  the  expansion  of competitively  produced  supplies from  countries  like  India,  China,  and Egypt had been undermining the once dominant position of America in the  world  cotton  market.  In addition,  synthetic  fibers  like  rayon  were rapidly becoming fiercely competitive rivals. The artificially  high cotton price  that  was  supported  by  AAA  policies  simply  accelerated  these trends.  As Schultz  concluded,  "[f]he  operation  of these causes  cannot be  stopped." 18

In light of these developments, the AAA would  soon come to realize that the achievement of lasting parity would require more than emergency-or  even  permanent-production  controls,  and  that  a better  future for the sick American cotton industry had to be sought in a far-reaching reorganization  of the economic  structure of the Cotton  South. In 1933, however,  the  nation  was  engulfed  in  an  economic  emergency  with potentially far  reaching  social and political consequences. The call was to action, with the idea that the enactment of Section  13 in the not-toodistant future would signal the  end of the present crisis. In the meantime, the fate  of the  Cotton South  was entrusted  to the  Plan.

The primary  objective  in  1933 was to increase farm  income immediately.  An  administration network  had  to  be  organized,  not  only  to decide  on  goals,  benefit payment  schemes,  and  the  fine  details  of legality  and  accounting,  but  also  to  secure  and  police  contracts  with each individual producer who desired to cooperate. This was a massive undertaking and planners were so rushed in 1933 that many details that would later become  controversial  were  overlooked.

For  example,  the  planners  made  no  provisions  for  a  state  board  of review to oversee the operations at the local level. Most AAA directives were  issued  through  State  Directors  of  Extension  Services  or  their designates. County agents were assigned to do the county work and 246 emergency  agents were  appointed to supplement the 733  already employed in the Cotton South. In turn, each county agent was instructed  to appoint  an assisting  county  committee  of from  three to five men, and  local  committees  of  three  members  each,  to  negotiate  offers  with producers  and  handle  the  work  in  their  respective  localities.  Each

county agent was instructed to "select men of character and ability who were  leaders  in  the  county  or  community  and  in  sympathy  with  the program." 19 Many  of those  on  county  committees  were  businessmen, bankers, and large planters, who in turn chose the local and community committees. The AAA clearly  understood  that  the national  success of the  program  required  the  enlistment  of  those  local  people  who  controlled  land  and  capital,  yet  no  national  system  was  established  to monitor  and  check  matters  at  the  local  level.  Later  we  shall  see  that there  was  another  major  administrative  directive  that  benefited  landowners at the expense  of laborers.

The  Secretary  of  Agriculture  publicly  announced  the  details  of  the 1933 program on June  19th of that year.  Since it was late in the season with most of the crop planted, the AAA decided that  10 million acresabout  one fourth  of  the  total  U.S. cotton  crop-should  be plowed  up. All offers  had to be submitted  by July 9th. In just two short months the AAA  had  devised  a  plan,  hired  a  staff,  issued  forms,  conducted  an educational campaign, obtained farmer  support, and received over one million  contracts  agreeing  to  plow  up  almost 10.5  million  acres  of cotton. The farm price of cotton increased from approximately 5.7 cents a pound on December  1, 1932 to about 9.4 cents a pound on December 1,  1933. A study by the Brookings Institute estimated that, after  adding in  rental  payments,  this  resulted  in  a  $400 million  increase  in  cottongenerated gross income alone and a $700 million increase in total value of total farm output. 20 Unlike most studies of the AAA programs, which have concentrated  on either administrative politics or the  effectiveness of the policies at achieving parity, our purpose is to trace out the impact of the Cotton Plans on the structure of southern agrarian labor markets and the scale of  production.

## THE  COTTON  PLANS

For contract  purposes  a  farm  was  defined  as  "a  tract  of land  under one  control  or  forming  a  single  property  devoted  to  agriculture." 21 From  the  very  beginning  administrators  were  well  aware  that  the distribution  of  benefit  payments  among  tenure  groups  would  prove difficult.  The general policy  was to "give the benefits  so far as possible to the actual operator  in the first instance. 22

The problem of benefit  distribution, however, took on new aspects in the  South  because  a  large  fraction  of  the  tenants  were  croppers  and

- 19 Henry  Richards, Cotton Under the Agricultural Adjustment Act ( Washington,  D.C.,  1934), p. 17.

- 21 David  Wayne  Ganger, The Impact of Mechanization, p.  36.

sharetenants on plantations, and were not considered by landlords to be actual  "producers"  or  "operators"  but  merely  laborers  paid  with  a share  of  the  crop. 23 Nonetheless,  out  of  the  hasty  formulation  of  the 1933  plow-up  program  came  a  contract  that specified that benefit payments  and  option  rights were  to  be  divided  between  landlord  and tenant in accordance with their share in the crop, not in accordance with their legal or perceived  status as a  "producer."

This  problem  attracted  immediate  attention  in  the  early  stages  of planning  for  the  1934-1935 cotton  contract.  Many  landlords  were  not satisfied  with their share under the plow-up program and resented  those "government  people"  breaking tradition  by  sending checks directly  to croppers.  The  AAA  attempted  to  rewrite  the  contract  in  terms  that would not alienate landlords and defeat the objective of securing a large sign-up, yet at the same time allow for some flexibility in the determination of a tenant's  legal  status. For contract  purposes  the AAA decided to  distinguish  between  a  sharetenant  and  a  "managing  sharetenant," with the latter defined  as  "a  sharetenant  who furnishes  the work  stock equipment, the labor used in the production of cotton and who manages the  operation  of  the  farm." 24 In  addition,  the  new  contract  weakened the legal status of all non-managing sharetenants and croppers by adding the stipulation that only  "a  producer who was an owner, landlord, cash tenant or managing sharetenant and who operated or controlled a cotton farm  could  be  a  party  to  a 1934  or 1935  cotton  contract." 25 The determination  of  the  tenants' "management"  status  was  left  to  the county  committees  and  was crucial  in  determining  the  distribution  of benefits  in  1934 and  1935.

Table  3  summarizes  the  benefit  schemes  for  the  programs  of  1933 through  1939. In  1934 the  landlord's  share  was  zero  if  the  contracted acreage was  on a cash tenant's plot, one-half if on  a managing sharetenant's plot, and one if on the sharecropper's  plot or on the wage

23 In  most Deep  South  states  the landlord-cropper  relationship  was  legally  one of  employeremployee.  The  landlord  owned  and  controlled  the  crop,  while  the  cropper  held  a laborer's  lien  on a share  of  it  as  a piece-rate  p a y m e n t  for  his  labor  services.  The  law  was  more  ambiguous  in  the  case of  sharetenants,  probably because  they  owned  some  wealth  that  could  be used  as collateral  to secure  annual  loans  to cover  production  expenses.  There  is evidence,  however,  that  both  classes were  closely  supervised  and  in practice  the  differences  were  more  of degree  than  substance. See Charles  S. Mangum, The Legal Status of  the Tenant Farmer in the Southeast (Chapel  Hill,  1952); Harold  D.  Woodman,  "Post-Civil  War  Southern  Agriculture  and  the  L a w , " Agricultural History, 53  (Jan. 1979),  319-37  and  "Postbellum  Social  Change  and  its Effects  on Marketing  the South's Cotton  C r o p , " Agricultural History, 56 (Jan.  1982), 215-30.  Also  see  the  special  report  by  the  U.S. Bureau  of the  Census, Plantation Farming in the  United States (Washington,  D.C.,  1916). In the section  defining  the  exact  nature  of the  system  of production  called  a  "tenant plantation," the r e p o r t was  compelled  to state  that  "Beyond  question,  however,  in most  instances  the  plantations for which  statistics  a r e hereafter presented  are those  on which  very  considerable  supervision  is exercised  over  the tenants  and on which  the  position  of the  tenants  is in many  respects  not  far different  from  that  of wage  laborers,"  p.  13.

- 24 Nourse,  et al., Three Years of  the  AAA  . . ., p . 343.
- 25 Henry  Richards, Three Years Under the AAA .  .  .,  p .  109.

TABLE  3 AAA  BENEFIT  PAYMENT SCHEMES,  1933-1939

| Item                       | 1933   | 1934   | 1935   | 1936   | 1937   | 1938   | 1939   |
|----------------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Rental  rate/lb.           | 6.00   | 3.50   | 3.50   |        |        |        |        |
| Soil  building/lb.         |        |        |        | 5.00   | 5.50   | 5.50   | 5.50   |
| Landlords  share(s)  from: |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Cash  Tenant               | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    |
| Managing  Sharetenant      | .25    | .50    | .50    | .50    | .50    | .25    | .25    |
| Sharetenant                | .25    | 1.00   | 1.00   | .50    | .50    | .25    | .25    |
| Sharecropper               | .50    | 1.00   | 1.00   | .75    | .75    | .50    | .50    |
| Wage Worker                | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   |
| Parity  Payment/lb.        |        | 1.00   | 1.00   | -      | -      | 1.60   | 1.80   |
| Soil  Conserving/acre      | -      | -      | -      | $1.00  | $1.00  | $1.00  | -      |
| Landlords  share(s)  from: |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Cash  Tenant               | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    | .00    |
| Managing  Sharetenant      | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    |
| Sharetenant                | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    | .25    |
| Sharecropper               | .50    | .50    | .50    | .50    | .50    | .50    | .50    |
| Wage  Worker               | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   | 1.00   |

Sources:  Henry  I.  Richards, Cotton and  the  AAA (Washington,  D.C.,  1936).

U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Adjustment Administration, Reports  of the Administration of  the  Agricultural Adjustment Act  for May  1933  through  June, 1940 (Washington,  D.C.,  1934-1940).

acreage. The lower half of the table summarizes the landlord's share of the  parity  and  soil  conservation  payments.  These  data  can  be used  to calculate  the  per  acre  benefit  payments  accruing to the landlord  under various tenure  arrangements  and  yields. Table 4 reports  such  data  for acres  yielding  200  and  350  lbs.  of  lint  cotton. According  to  those

TABLE  4 AAA  BENEFIT  PAYMENT PER ACRE,  1933-1939 (Dollars)

|                          |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |   OnAcre  Yielding  200  lbs. Lint  in Year |
|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Landlord's  Amount  From |                                        1933 |                                      1934   |                                     1935    |                                     1936    |                                     1937    |                                      1938   |                                     1939    |
| Cash Tenant              |                                           0 |                                         0   |                                        0    |                                        0    |                                        0    |                                         0   |                                        0    |
| Managing  Tenant         |                                           3 |                                         6.5 |                                        4.13 |                                        5.25 |                                        5.75 |                                         3.8 |                                        3.65 |
| Sharetenant              |                                           3 |                                        12.5 |                                        7.63 |                                        5.25 |                                        5.75 |                                         3.8 |                                        3.65 |
| Sharecropper             |                                           6 |                                        13   |                                        8.25 |                                        8    |                                        8.75 |                                         7.6 |                                        7.3  |
| Wage Worker              |                                          12 |                                        14   |                                        9.5  |                                       11    |                                       12    |                                        15.2 |                                       14.6  |

## OnAcre  Yielding  350  lbs. Lint  in Year

| Landlord's  Amount  From   |   1933 |   1934 |   1935 |   1936 |   1937 |   1938 |   1939 |
|----------------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Cash  Tenant               |   0    |   0    |   0    |   0    |   0    |   0    |   0    |
| Managing  Tenant           |   5.25 |  11.38 |   6.22 |   9    |   9.87 |   6.46 |   6.39 |
| Sharetenant                |   5.25 |  21.88 |  13.34 |   9    |   9.87 |   6.46 |   6.39 |
| Sharecropper               |  10.5  |  22.75 |  14.44 |  13.63 |  14.94 |  12.92 |   9.77 |
| Wage Worker                |  21    |  24.5  |  16.63 |  18.5  |  20.25 |  25.85 |  25.55 |

Source: Table 3.

calculations a landlord who agreed to contract out of production an acre of cotton from,  say, the wage system would have received $24.50 from the government in 1934 if that acre yielded 350 lbs. of lint cotton. If the acre had come out of a managing tenant's plot he would have received only  $11.38. After  1934 there  was  a  steady  decline  in  the  amount  the landlord  would  have  received  for  a  tenant  acre,  whereas  the  amount received  for  a wage acre  shows a steady  upward  trend.

To assure participation, the Bankhead Bill was approved by Congress on April  13, 1934 and gave the Federal government the right to tax any cotton above an alloted  amount. Transferrable  cotton  certificates  were allocated first to states, then to counties and then to individual farms in accordance  with  their  respective  shares  in  the  national,  state,  and county  total  cotton  acreage.  These  certificates  could  be  used  to  pay  a ginning  tax  levied  on  all  cotton,  and  any  output  above  the  alloted amount for which producers had tax exemption certificates was taxed at 50 percent of the market price. Small farms growing less than two bales of  cotton  or  having  fewer  than five acres  were  exempted  completely. There  were  no  allotments  in 1936  and 1937,  but  they were  again instituted  in  1938 and  1939. 26

There  was  also  a  constraint at the  other  extreme. In 1934,  for instance, a producer could not contract to take more than 45 percent of his  base  year's  cotton  acreage  out  of  production.  A similar  constraint was imposed  in each  of the AAA contract  years.

After  the changes in the  1934 contract it would appear that a landlord now had relatively less to gain from displacement because most tenants were now entitled to only a fraction of their former share of the benefits. But the  1933 offer  was announced after the season's labor contracts had been negotiated  and  could  have  had  no effect  on the choice  of tenure. The  only  way  for  landlords  to  have  secured  the  tenant's  share  of  the benefit  payment  would  have  been  through  cheating.  In  contrast,  the 1934 through  1939 contracts  were to be negotiated before the  planting and provided ample time for landlords to adjust  to each  situation.  This timing  also  gave  mobile  tenants  the  opportunity  to  penalize  cheating landlords  by  allowing  them  time  to  move  to  a  "fair" plantation.  In short,  while  most  tenants  experienced  a diminution  in both  their legal status  and  benefit  shares  in  1934, any  additional  adjustments  deemed desirable by a landlord  had to be made through alterations in the tenure status of his land.  Cheating could be  costly!

## THE AAA INCENTIVE  TO  DISPLACE  TENANTS

Consider  a  typical  plantation  before  the  AAA  Programs.  Figure  1 depicts how the harvest labor constraint  referred  to in the  Agricultural Experimental  Station  reports  affected  the allocation  of improved  acreage between the tenant and wage systems. We can represent production in the tenant system by the function  V, (L,T,)-a value function  relating the family  stock of labor,  L,  and  the  size of the  tenant  plot, T ,  to  the t resulting  value  of  output  from  the  year's  production. 27 Given  b  (the share of output value retained by the tenant), the landlord's net revenue per acre put in the tenant  system is (l-b)Vt/Tt. To each land-labor  ratio corresponds  a  crop  mix, at , which  is  the  cotton  share  of  improved acreage in the tenant system. A smaller plot size for a given family labor stock  forces  a  greater  intensity  of  land  use  and  therefore  results  in  a higher  cotton  share  and  output  value  per  acre.  In  the  wage  system vw(aw)  is the  output  value  per  acre, p(a w) and  m(aw)  are  the  per  acre inputs of labor and equipment respectively, and w is the wage and r the price of non-labor inputs. In addition to these per acre costs, there is an expected cost of recruiting, or gathering, any downstream harvest labor above the preharvest  labor requirements. This expected  cost  increases at  an  increasing  rate  with  the  amount  of  recruited  labor  (that  is,  as the size of the wage system and/or the crop mix increases). Thus, given a  cropmix  on  the  wage  system  the  landlord's  marginal  net  revenue per  acre  falls  as  the  wage  system  expands.  Any  net  revenue  maximizing  landlord  would  tend  to  allocate  the  plantation  improved  acreage, T,  between  the  two  systems  of  production  so  as  to  equate  their marginal  net  revenues  per  acre.  The  plantation  is  thereby divided into  a  wage  system  of  size  T w'  and  n   tenant  plots  of  size  T ,  that  is, 1 t T  =  T w'  +  n   T . 1 t 28

Now consider the position after  1934. The owner of the plantation  is presented  with  the  additional  opportunity  to  receive  a  share,  s,  of  the government rental payment of B dollars for every cotton acre taken out of production. The value of the contract to the landlord depends on the tenure status of the rented acres. Suppose the landlord decides to rent x percent of his base year cotton acreage to the government. If the rented acreage  is distributed  equitably  between  the two labor  systems  then  x percent  of  the  cotton  acreage  in  the  wage  system,  .x(a wTw'),  and  x percent  of  the  cotton  acreage  in  the  tenant  system,  .x(a,n'T )  will  be t offered.  The  landlord  will then  receive  a  share  s of the total  payments for the acres taken out of the tenant  system and all of the payments  for the land  taken  from  his wage  system.

From  the  tenants'  point  of  view,  this  would  have  been  the "fair" thing  to  do.  Having  tilled  the  land  and  being  members  of  a  failing industry  that  was  entrusted  to  the  government's  care,  they  probably expected to share in the government benefits. Why else did the contract specify  different  shares for different  tenures? We can define their  "fair" landlord's  benefit  payment for  x percent  of the cotton  acreage  as

$$.xB [(awTj)  +  s(otn'Tt)]. (1)$$

This leaves  (1-s) (a n'Tt t )  for  the  tenants.

Regardless  of  how  fair  this  distribution  may  have  seemed  to  the tenants on the plantation,  it was clearly not the best the landlord  could do.  If  he  could  convince  the  local  AAA  committee  that  all  of  the contracted  acreage should (or did) come out of the wage system then he could  have  contracted  to  withhold  the  same  amount  of  acreage  from cotton  production,  but  instead  of  equitably  distributing  the  acres  and payments  across  the  two  labor  systems  he could  have taken  all of  the cotton acres from  the tenant system and reported  them as having come from  the  wage  system.

Such an act,  however,  would  seem unfair  to the tenants.  After  they and  their  families  had  cropped  and  lived  on  "their"  land,  it  was  now being taken from  them and left  idle. Such a "mean"  landlord would be scorned from  afar,  but after the changes in the  1934 contract  there was not  much  more  they  could  do. 29 In  the  meantime  their landlord  would collect  a benefit  payment of

$$.xB [(owTw )  +  (at 1 n'Tt)]. (2)$$

which  would  leave  the  tenants  nothing.  Their  landlord  would  then allocate  the remaining  acreage between  the two labor  systems  so as to equate  the  marginal  returns. This solution  is depicted  in Figure  1.

We  can  easily calculate  the per acre economic  returns  to this

29 The use  of  the  word  "mean"  is  not to  be interpreted  as a  value judgment.  Much  has  been written about  the  existence  of a  subtle, paternalistic  relationship between  landlord  and  tenant in many  sectors of the  Plantation  South. For a very  small representative  sample of the  voluminous literature  on just  the  Depression  decade  see  Davis, Gardner,  Gardner,  and  Warner, Deep South (Chicago,  1941); John  Dollard, Caste  and Class in a Southern  Town (Garden  City,  N.J.,  1957); Guion  Johnson, "Southern Paternalism Towards  Negroes  after Emancipation," Journal  of Southern History, 23 (Nov.  1957); Gunnar Myrdal, An  American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and  Modern Democracy (New  York,  1963); Hortense  Powdermaker, After  Freedom: A Cultural Study  in the Deep South (New York,  1968), and Bertram Doyle, The Etiquette of Race  Relations (Chicago,  1937).

I am not willing to ignore the vivid pictures painted by these accounts and for that reason  refrain from  characterizing  displacement  as  merely  the  termination  of  a  legal  contract.  Still,  a  bias  is apparent in the choice of vantagepoint; the unprofitable retention of excess tenants for noneconomic reasons imposed an economic cost on such a "fair"  landlord! Since most of this study has been concerned with the landlord's net revenue calculations, however, I have chosen this opportunity to give tenants some equal time. In either case a choice would have been made.

FIGURE  I THE ALLOCATION OF PLANTATION ACREAGE BEFORE AND AFTER THE AAA

<!-- image -->

w

displacement  by  simply  subtracting  Equation  1 from  Equation  2  and dividing  through  by  the  acres  rented  to  the  government.  We  can  see from  Table 5 that after  1934 the landlord's  per acre  return from  tenant displacement  steadily  increased.  On an acre yielding 350 lbs. of  cotton the return from  displacing a sharecropper  increased from  $1.78 in 1934 to  $16.78 by  1939. Over  the  same  period  the  return  from  displacing  a sharetenant  increased  even  more-from  $2.62  to  $19.16  per  acre.  A once  "fair"  landlord,  responding  to  his  tenants'  pleas  for "fairness" may soon have had to reply "I'm  sorry, but the cost has simply become unbearable."

If cheating  were  costless  then a  landlord  could have  reduced  a tenant's  cotton  acreage  by  up  to  100  percent  and  taken  the  benefit payments  from  him-amd the  tenant  would  have  still  remained  on  the premises. The  tenant  could  have  been  allowed  to produce  other  crops on  his  plot  and  periodically  work  on  the  landlord's  crops.  This  would have reduced the uncertainty of downstream labor supplies and induced an  expansion  of  the  wage  system.  But  there  was  no  reason  for  the landlord  to  stop  there.  If  labor  had  no  other  economic  opportunities then  the  landlord  could  have  also  consolidated  the  tenant  system  and mechanized  without  having to worry  about downstream  harvest  labor. In short,  displacement  results, regardless of the cost of cheating,  when

## (Dollars)

TABLE  5 PER ACRE ECONOMIC RETURNS TO TENANT DISPLACEMENT,  1934-1939

|      | On Acre  Yielding 200 lbs. Lint   | On Acre  Yielding 200 lbs. Lint   |
|------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Year | from  Sharetenanl                 | from  Sharecropper                |
| 1934 | 1.50                              | 1.00                              |
| 1935 | 1.87                              | 1.25                              |
| 1936 | 5.75                              | 3.00                              |
| 1937 | 6.25                              | 7.50                              |
| 1938 | 11.40                             | 7.60                              |
| 1939 | 10.95                             | 7.30                              |

## On Acre  Yielding 350 lbs. Lint

|      |   from  Sharetenant |   from  Sharecropper |
|------|---------------------|----------------------|
| 1934 |                2.62 |                 1.75 |
| 1935 |                3.29 |                 2.19 |
| 1936 |                9.5  |                 4.87 |
| 1937 |               10.38 |                 5.31 |
| 1938 |               19.38 |                12.93 |
| 1939 |               19.16 |                16.78 |

Source: Table 4.

we simultaneously consider the AAA incentive to displace and the cost economics of large-scale  mechanization. 30

## THE PRICE INCENTIVE TO  DISPLACE  TENANTS

Price movements during the Depression could have been an additional  factor  behind  the  observed  displacement.  Even  without  AAA  payments and cotton  acreage controls, price movements during the period could have induced a reallocation of land out of tenancies and into wage systems. The relevant price ratio to be considered here is the farm wage normalized by the price of cotton, that is, the cotton price of wage labor. When  this  wage  increases  it  becomes  relatively  more  profitable for landlords to grow cotton with tenants because they can pay tenant labor with  the  now  relatively  cheaper  cotton  commodity.  Conversely,  when the  cotton  price  of  wage  labor  decreases  it  becomes  relatively  more profitable  to  cultivate  with  wage  labor  instead  of  paying  tenant  labor with the now relatively  more expensive  cotton.

The last column of Table 6 reports this wage series for  1925-1940. In the  early  years  of  the  Depression,  and  prior  to  the  1933 plow-up,  the

30 Even  after  incorporating  the  cost  economics  of  large  scale  mechanization,  the  shift  from sharetenancy to wage labor may have been restricted  by the landlord's higher cost of supervising wage  laborers.  As  Alston  correctly  argues,  however,  mechanization  reduced  the  amount  of required  supervision  per  acre  by  standardizing  output  and  reducing  the  amount  of  labor  to  be supervised  (See Alston,  "Tenure  Choice").

(Dollars)

TABLE  6 AVERAGE COTTON  PRICE  AND MISSISSIPPI  WAGE  RATES,  1925-1940

|      |                                | Nominal Wage  ($)   | Nominal Wage  ($)            | Cotton Wage  ($)'   | Cotton Wage  ($)'            |
|------|--------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------------|
| Year | (I) Cotton Price  (lbs.) Cents | (2) Daily           | (3) Picking (per  100  lbs.) | (4) Daily           | (5) Picking (per  100  lbs.) |
| 1925 | 19.61                          | 1.55                | 1.35                         | 7.90                | 6.88                         |
| 1926 | 12.47                          | 1.56                | 1.16                         | 12.50               | 9.30                         |
| 1927 | 20.19                          | 1.56                | 1.08                         | 7.73                | 5.35                         |
| 1928 | 17.98                          | 1.56                | 1.02                         | 8.68                | 5.67                         |
| 1929 | 16.78                          | 1.55                | 1.08                         | 9.24                | 6.44                         |
| 1930 | 9.46                           | 1.40                | .56                          | 14.80               | 5.92                         |
| 1931 | 5.66                           | .93                 | .37                          | 16.43               | 6.88                         |
| 1932 | 6.52                           | .68                 | .40                          | 10.43               | 6.13                         |
| 1933 | 10.17                          | .65                 | .49                          | 6.40                | 4.82                         |
| 1934 | 12.36                          | .79                 | .55                          | 6.39                | 4.45                         |
| 1935 | 11.09                          | .83                 | .50                          | 7.48                | 4.51                         |
| 1936 | 12.36                          | .89                 | .60                          | 7.20                | 4.85                         |
| 1937 | 8.41                           | 1.00                | .60                          | 11.89               | 7.13                         |
| 1938 | 8.60                           | .95                 | .50                          | 11.60               | 5.81                         |
| 1939 | 9.09                           | .95                 | .50                          | 10.45               | 5.50                         |
| 1940 | 9.89                           | .97                 | .51                          | 9.81                | 5.16                         |

Notes:  ' Nominal  wage  divided  by  the  cotton  price.

Sources:  The  average  cotton  price  series  is  taken  from  U.S.  Bureau  of  the  Census, Historical Census  of  the  United  States: Colonial Times  to  1957 (Washington,  D.C.,  1960),  p. 301. The nominal wage series is taken from USDA, Crops  and Markets Vol.  19, no. 5 and Vol. 18,  no.  11.

cotton price of daily farm labor was well above its late 1920s level. After the  1933 plow-up, however, the cotton price rose from an average 6.520 per  lb.  in  1932  to  10.170  per  lb.,  while  the  daily  farm  wage  slightly declined from  680 to 650 per day.  As a result, the cotton  price of daily farm  labor  plummeted  and  remained  low  throughout  the 1933-1936 period. This price change would have tended to induce a displacement of  tenants  to  make  way  for  the  expanding-and  now  cheaper-wage system of  production.

But the downward  slide was stemmed, and by the latter years of the Depression the cotton price of wage  labor had regained its preDepression  level.  In  1935  the  Bankhead  quota  scheme  was  declared unconstitutional,  making  the  1936  and  1937  plans  voluntary  without penalties  for  non-compliance.  By  1937  the  total  U.S.  cotton  acreage harvested  had  reached  over  33.6  million  acres  and  the  exceptional weather  conditions  of that  year  helped  produce  a  record  U.S.  crop of over  18.9 million bales. The cotton price dipped from an average  12.360 per lb. in  1936 to 8.410  per  lb. in  1937. The cotton  price of wage  labor shot up from its 1936 level of 7.200 to 11.890 and remained above its pre-

Depression level for the remainder of the decade. Although the southern farm  real wage in terms of consumer purchasing power never regained its pre-Depression level, the cotton price of wage  labor  did. Its movement, therefore, probably had no net impact over the course of the decade  on  the  allocation  of  land  between  the  two  labor  systems.  In addition, cotton wages would have been higher had there been no AAA because  the  policies  were  designed  to  increase  the  price  of  cotton  by reducing production of the most labor demanding southern crop. These higher  cotton  wages  would  have  increased  the  demand  for  tenants, rather than cause displacement. Consequently, much of the reason why price  movements  did  not  increase  tenancy  during  the  1930s  can  be traced  to the reduced  wages and increased  cotton prices caused by the AAA programs.

## THE  EXTENT  OF  DISPLACEMENT

If  nothing  else  changed  as  a  landlord  followed the  displacement strategy, and if the plantation was large enough, then the size of the new wage  system  would  have  approximated  the  old  one  plus  the  acreage rented  to  the  government. 31 The  number  of tenants  on the  plantation, however,  would  have  declined.  This  can  be  seen  by utilizing  the  land constraint, n' =  (T  -  TJVT,, and the equalities Tw'  = Tw j 2 and T  = T , 1 2 that  is,

$$T 1 -Tw'  .x(wTw'  +  atn'Tt) "2 = T i =  n   (1  1 .xat ) -.x  - ; -(3) At$$

Using  Equation  3  we  can  now  form  an  expression  to  predict  the percentage of the  1930 tenant labor force  that  would be displaced  if all landlords followed  this  strategy  and  if nothing  else  changed:

$$f n 2 / awTw'\ 1 -7 - -y + -jtr} (4)$$

where  1 -  n /n'  is  the  percentage  of  the  tenant  labor  force  displaced 2 between  1930 and  1940 and Tw'/Tt  measures  the  number of  additional tenants  that  could  have  been  placed  on  the  plantation  in  1930.  The landlord reports that all of his cotton acreage has come out of the wage

system and therefore  a w  =  1. Now Equation 4 reduces to

$$,2 / ,,0\ (5) n n$$

where n =  7V/T,.

Census data for the Delta can be plugged into the RHS of Equation 5 to  predict  the  extent  of  displacement  assuming  all  landlords  followed this strategy. Unfortunately, we  do  not  have  data  on  at. We  do, however, know that the overall  crop mix for the Delta was  .78 in 1930 and we have every reason  to believe that the crop mix on tenant  plots was  higher  than  the  crop  mix  on  the  landlord's  farm.  In  Table  7 we estimate  the  extent  of  displacement  assuming  at =  .78; the  estimate, therefore,  should  underestimate  the actual  displacement.

The calculation predicts that 33 percent  of the number of tenants  on plantations  in  1930  would  have  been  displaced  by  1940.  Landlords contracted  to  remove  33  percent  of  their 1930  cotton  acreage  and according to the parameter values this would have displaced 33 percent of  the 1930  tenant  labor  force. 32 The  actual  percentage displaced, however,  was only 22 percent.  Much  of the difference  stems from  the expansion  of  total  improved  acreage.  If  we  assume  that  improved acreage  in  the  Delta  did  not  expand during  the  Depression  (as  is assumed  in  Equations  3 to  5), then  37 percent  of  the  1930 labor  force would have been displaced. The  4  percent difference between this  measure  of  displacement  and  the  predicted  one  is  probably  due

32 There is no mechanical  reason for a,  +  n/n  to approximate  1  as it does in this calculation. 2

TABLE  7 EXTENT OF TENANT  DISPLACEMENT DUE TO AAA INCENTIVE,  1930-1940

|                                             |   A.  Calculations |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Predicted displacement  if AT = 0           |               0.33 |
| Actual displacement,  1930-1940             |               0.22 |
| Actual displacement  if AT =  0,  1930-1940 |               0.37 |

|                      | B.  Parameter Values I  (1930)   | 2 (1940)   |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|------------|
| Total Cotton Acreage | 2,463,999                        | 1,634,648  |
| T                    | 3,158,974                        | 3,645,274  |
| TV                   | 571,774                          | 1,482,343  |
| n                   | 30,414                           | -          |
| n'                   | 137,617                          | 106,388    |
| a,'                  | 0.78                             | 0.46       |
| T,'                  | 18.8                             | 19.4       |
| n/n'                | 0.22                             | -          |

Source: See Table 1.

to  the  underestimation  of  at . If  a, =  .90  then  the  differential would disappear. 33

Thus, it appears that landlords could have captured all of the benefits without  appearing  to  be  too  evictive  by  simply  expanding  improved acreage and reabsorbing some of the tenants. The displacement was still high  (22  percent),  and  if  landlords  continued  to  plant  their  allotted amounts  of  cotton  then  none  of  the  reabsorbed  tenants  (15 percent  of the  1930 labor  force)  could  produce  cotton  without  paying  the  federal tax  on excess  supplies.

Under  normal  circumstances  some of these displaced  tenants  would have  been  reabsorbed. The  displaced tenants would  have  exerted downward  pressure  on  the  size  of  the  plots  of  the  remaining  tenants. The lower land-labor ratio would have forced  more intensive cultivation of tenant plots, thereby increasing the landlord's net revenue per acre in the tenant  system and inducing a reallocation of some land back to that system.

Most of this adjustment,  however, normally operated through a rise in the  share  of  land  planted  to cotton.  But  under  the  stipulations  of  the AAA  contract,  and  faced  with  a  substantial  tax  on  excess  cotton  in every  year  except  1936 and  1937, much of this flexibility was lost. The fact  that  farms  growing  less  than  two  bales  or  having  fewer  than  ten acres  were  exempt  from  this tax  may explain  the dramatic increase in the number of very small farms during this period. The number of farms in the Delta states with less than ten acres increased from 34,421 in 1930 to  50,481  by  1940. 34 The  underemployed  tenants  on  these  small  plots represented  a  new  source  of  relatively  secure  wage  labor  to  be  employed  on the landlord's farm  when needed.  Ironically, the  availability of  these  "wage-labor  families"  reduced  the cost  of farming  with  wage labor and provided  yet another reason to displace tenants to make way for  the  expanding  wage  system. 35

The economic  returns  to tenant  displacement  under  the  AAA  plans far  outweighed  the costs and, in fact,  increased  as the decade wore on. On  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  possible  costs  of  displacement  (for example, general  poverty  and unemployment,  social  unrest  emanating

33 T h e s e estimates  assume  all landlords  followed  the displacement  strategy.  Some  landlords, however,  probably  retained  their  tenants  and  shared  the  government  payments.  These  estimates also  assume  that  T w 2 =  Tu- .  But the AAA  induced  displacement  and unemployment  probably 1 r e d u c e d t h e cost  of  gathering  harvest  labor.  This  would  generate  T w 2 &gt;  T w ' and more t e n a nt displacement.  Apparently  these  two  effects  cancelled  each  other  because  the  difference between t h e actual  and estimated  displacement  is small.

34 Calculated from U.S.  Department  of Commerce,  Bureau  of the  Census, 16th Census of the United States, 1940, Agriculture Vol.  Ill,  General Report.

33 Some  contemporary  accounts  refer  to these  underemployed  tenants  as  "combination cropperwage  families"  that  emerged  during  the  Depression,  and  as "one  of the  most  significant changes taking place with reference t o  the  plantation tenancy system  . .  ." [Mississippi Agricultural Experimental Station, Bulletin  no. 385  (June 1943),  p. 49.]  Other  reports  call  them "wage-labor families."  (See,  for instance,  Arkansas  Experimental Station,  Bulletins  no.  384,  397,  and  438).

from  disoriented  communities  that  had been  uprooted,  and  an  outflow of  harvest  labor  after  the  income  reductions)  were  offset  by  various counteracting factors:  Displaced tenants could be reabsorbed  on newly cleared land as long as they did not grow more than two bales of cotton; a  tenant  could  grow  all  the  cotton  he  could  if his  tenant  plot  had  less than  five  acres; some  underemployed tenants could work  on  the landlord's  crops  in  addition  to  their  own;  labor  did  not  move  out  as expected, because  of  the  general  economic stagnation during the Depression;  and,  of  course,  the  arrival  of  various  government-sponsored  work  programs  offered  a  new  source  of  local  non-agricultural employment.

The general effect  on land tenure patterns  throughout  the  South  can be seen  from Table  8.  That table does  not reveal the shifts as dramatically  as the Delta data because  plantations  and other farms  are mixed in the aggregate  measures. Nonetheless, the  shift  is discernible. Farmland grew by 7.9 percent during the 1930s, whereas land outside of tenancies expanded by 13.6 percent. Land in tenancies declined by only 1.9 percent.  But the most interesting and revealing shifts are among the subclasses. Was the net movement up the tenure ladder or down? Were croppers  approaching  cash  tenancy  (and  possibly  land  ownership),  or were owners losing their land and becoming cash tenants while croppers were being displaced into the wage labor class? The results of the Delta analysis  imply  that  croppers  and  cash  tenants  were  being displaced  in the plantation districts. The 29.4 percent decline in the amount of land in cropper  plots  probably  occurred  in  these  plantation  districts,  where most croppers were located. The 21.8 percent expansion in the amount of land in cash tenancies that we observe in Table 8 must have occurred in  the  non-plantation  districts  surrounding  the  Black  Belt  and  Delta. Unfortunately  we  cannot  determine  the  class  from  which  these  cash tenants came until we study the impact of the New Deal in these farming areas.

TABLE  8 LAND IN THE CENSUS SOUTH BY TENURE,  1930 AND 1940 s

| Tenure            | 1930        | 1940        |   % Change |
|-------------------|-------------|-------------|------------|
| All Farms         | 343,086,418 | 370,168,461 |        7.9 |
| Owned and Managed | 217,662,590 | 247,155,471 |       13.6 |
| Tenants           | 125,423,828 | 123,012,990 |       -1.9 |
| Cash              | 27,161,469  | 33,079,017  |       21.8 |
| Cropper           | 31,604,701  | 22,313,457  |      -29.4 |
| All other         | 66,657,658  | 67,620,516  |        1.4 |

Nevertheless, the displacement in the plantation sectors was substantial. The economic and social structure of the Cotton South would never return to its pre-Depression  state. The policies of the AAA programs of 1933 through  1939, while  expressly  implemented  to  increase  southern farm  income,  had  done  much  more.

## THE  NEW  DEAL  IN SOUTHERN  ECONOMIC  HISTORY

The Agricultural  Adjustment  Acts  were implemented  in response  to an  economic  emergency  of national  scope. It  was clearly  and  publicly stated that their primary purpose was to increase agricultural income as a  necessary  step  towards  full  recovery.  Yet by providing  new ways to escape, the Depression these policies inadvertently altered the  structure of labor  markets  in the  plantation  region of the  Cotton  South.

The policy makers at the AAA were not blind to the possible effects of these  policies,  nor  were  they  blind  to  the  social  consequences  of  the possible outcomes. Yet it was hard to argue that each landlord should be compelled to keep his usual number of tenants. Many tenants moved to different  plantations each year and the planners thought it might alienate landlords if the contract  gave tenants a short-term  but inalienable right to farm the land. Consequently, the AAA decided to deal primarily with the  plantation  owners  and  let them  handle their own  tenant  situations, although exceptions were  made  in  the  cases  of  cash tenants  and managing share  tenants.

As  a  gesture  of  concern  about  the  welfare of  tenants,  the 1934 contract  contained  the  controversial  paragraph  7 which  stated  that  the landlord  should

Endeavor in  good faith to  bring  about  the  reduction  of  acreage  contemplated  in  this contract in such a manner as to cause the least possible amount of labor, economic and social  disturbance,  and  to  this  end, in  so far  as possible, he  shall  effect  the  acreage reduction as nearly ratable as practicable among the tenants on this farm; shall, in so far as possible, maintain  on this farm  the normal number of tenants and other employees; shall  permit  all  tenants  to  continue in the occupancy  of their house  on this farm,  rent free,  for  the  years  1934 and 1935, respectively  (unless  such  tenant  shall  so  conduct himself as to become  a nuisance  or a menace to the welfare  of the producer),.  . . 36

Alger  Hiss  represented  the  Legal  Division  of  the  AAA  when  this paragraph was being drafted  and was the only dissenting voice. Ganger refers to a memorandum sent to Jerome Frank dated November 9,1933, in which Hiss argued that "the landlord-tenant paragraph in the contract was  not  legally  enforceable  and  pointed  out  that  several  vague  words would render it ineffective  because they would be subject to interpreta-

tion. Therefore  the producer's actions with respect to his tenants could not be successfully  challenged  by the  AAA." 37

Nonetheless,  the  paragraph  was  accepted  in  its  original  form  and ultimately  caused  a  severe  split  in the  AAA  between  the  Agrarians  in the Cotton Division and the Liberals in the Division of General Counsel. The antagonism reached its height over the Norcross case in Arkansas. Backed by the Southern Farmer Tenants Union, the conflict  ultimately came down to an attempted  reinterpretation  of paragraph 7 that would have essentially transformed  tenants into farmers  with full legal protection of the  right  to  remain  on the  land  and  share  in the  AAA  benefits. The case was decided in favor of Norcross because, as the court  ruled, tenants  were  not  parties  to  the  contract  and  therefore  could  not  bring suit to enforce it. On  February 5, 1935,  after Secretary Wallace disapproved  their  proposed  reinterpretation,  Jerome  Frank,  Francis Shea,  Lee  Pressman,  and  Gardner  Jackson  were  dismissed  from  the General  Counsel. 38

Other, less radical, tenant interests may have been more successful  at finding  a voice within the AAA power structure. For instance, the share of benefits going to tenants was increased in 1936 and again in 1938 (see Table 3). Also, benefit  payments were sent in two installments, the first during hoeing season and the second during the harvest period. The well intended  objective  of these  policy  changes  may  have  been  to  increase the tenant's  income and distribute it in a manner that would reduce his dependence on the landlord for credit. But, as we have seen, without a corresponding  entitlement  to  the  land  these  policies  simply  increased the  economic  returns  from  tenant  displacement  and  provided  cash  to pay  wages  during  peak  labor  periods  and  purchase  new  labor-saving, large-scale equipment  to be used  in the expanding  wage  system.

The  incentives  to  displace  tenants  were  substantial,  and  the  experience of low profit margins would have induced even the most traditional landlord  to  try  new  ways.  The  old  way  had  proven  best  over  a  long period of trial and error. On the demand side, considerations like annual variations  in  crop  yields  resulting  from the  ever  changing  climatic conditions, erratic  boll  weevil  destruction  of the  cotton  crop  since  the turn of the century, and wide fluctuations in the cotton  price had  made the  demand  for  a  particular  year's  harvest  labor  highly  uncertain. Regional concentration  in cotton  simply intensified  the effects  of these fluctuations.  On the  supply  side there  was the  ever  present  fear  that a laborer  without  an  annual  interest  in  the  crop  would  not  be  available when needed most. Local non-agricultural employment opportunities in the  plantation  areas  were  not flexible and  adequate  enough  to  provide

attractive  employment  during the off-season.  A family  looking for  such employment  could  surely find better  opportunities  in the  "big  city." 39 In many cases such a move was permanent and planters could not have been  blind  to  the  possibility  of  losing  a  good  laborer  and  his  family forever. Sharecropping and sharetenancy had  provided a working institutional  arrangement,  and the possibility  of one day moving up the tenure ladder to the cashtenant,  or even ownership, status provided  an additional  incentive  to  participate.

With the coming of the New Deal, however, all of this changed. The government subsidies reduced  the cost of testing the old arrangements. One  year  a  planter  may  have  tested  the  harvest  labor  market  by displacing just a few tenants. Quite to his surprise he may have realized that  because  the  cost  of  such  a  test  had  declined  for  everyone  other planters  had  done  the  same.  In  addition,  the  displaced  labor  had  not moved out,  as previously  expected,  because  of the depressed  employment  situation  in  the  urban  centers  during  the  1930s.  Once  this  was realized the process of transition was in motion and the New Deal in the Cotton  South  was  well  under  way.  The  expectation  of a  governmentstabilized cotton price, lump-sum cash payments to be used to purchase tractors and trucks, and a supply of agricultural labor abundant enough to  meet  any  expected  periodic  spurt  in  demand  was  thought  to  be enough insurance  against  the  unknown.

But when the economic boom induced by America's entry into World War II increased  the national demand for industrial labor, the  southern planter  quickly  realized  that  this  insurance  was  not  for  life.  Those laborers who had been displaced from  the land but not from  the region now severed their last ties to the land and left  in search of employment in the industrial centers of the North and South. Behind them remained the planter crying "labor-shortage," with one eye looking for a return to the  "good-old-days"  and  the  other  focused  on  the  developments  at International  Harvester.  The fears  that had so recently  been cast  aside had returned  to haunt them. With the coming of the mechanical  cotton picker,  however,  a permanent  solution  was at last on its  way. 40

This  perspective  does  not  imply  that  in  the  absence  of  government intervention  the  fortunes  of  planters  in  the  Cotton  South  would  have been perpetually tied to the availability of abundant cheap labor.  World cotton  demand  was  declining and  economic  returns  to  cotton  production,  even  where  based  on  cheap  labor,  would  have  suffered.  If  the

southern  cotton  industry  could  have  survived  such  a  debacle  it  is unlikely  that  the  same  institutional  forms  would  have  been  reestablished; the  tractor  technology  was available and  the  mechanical  picker was on the way.

The central  point,  however,  is that  the  New  Deal  on  the  plantation was a relatively better deal for the landlord,  and the era that  witnessed the  birth  of  Social  Security,  the  Wagner  Act,  and  the  National  Labor Relations  Board  was able to overlook agricultural labor in the  South. 41 Southern parity  was to be achieved  through  higher land values; at  this the  programs  were  successful.  But  individual  access  to a  share  of  the aggregate federal  income subsidy was based on the degree of individual control over this land, and the landlord's exclusive property rights were never  successfully  challenged  or  weakened.  Surely,  labor's de facto rights  in  the  land  were  strenghtened  in  the  hectic  days  preceding  the 1933 plow-up, and their legal rights could have been strengthened with a more  protective  paragraph  7.  But  landed  interests  promptly  protested the  slightest  infringement  and  in  both  cases  successfully  reestablished their exclusive  right to the land; that  elusive  "forty  acres and a  mule" was excluded  from  yet  another  New  Deal. The voices  may have  been raised and there may have been someone there to listen, but in the end wealth  prevailed,  while down below there  was labor for  the  picking.

41 The  disenfranchised  black  vote  in  a  solidly  Democratic  and  racially  divided  South  helped guarantee  the  political  expedience  of this  decision  for  Roosevelt,  who took  care  not  to  alienate southern  Congressmen.  See  Harvard  Sitkoff, A  New  Deal for  Blacks (Oxford,  1978); Raymond Wolters, Negroes and the Great Depression (Westport,  1970).