This article was downloaded by: [Harvard Library]

On: 05 October 2014, At: 19:21

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## The Journal of Peasant Studies

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:

http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fjps20

## Manning the Fields: Remaking Women's Work in the Tobacco South in the Twentieth Century

Evan P . Bennett Published online: 10 Mar 2009.

To cite this article: Evan P . Bennett (2008) Manning the Fields: Remaking Women's Work in the Tobacco South in the Twentieth Century, The Journal of Peasant Studies, 35:4, 720-741, DOI: 10.1080/03066150802682011

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03066150802682011

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sublicensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly

forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

D

## Manning the Fields: Remaking Women's Work in the Tobacco South in the Twentieth Century

## EVAN P. BENNETT

Today, men make up the vast majority of the workforce in the tobacco fields of the American South. This was not always the case. For more than two centuries, enslaved women worked alongside men in the tobacco fields. In the late nineteenth century, the unpaid labor of female kin made possible the household's replacement of the plantation as the center of production, and it remained critical for farm families well into the twentieth century. Following World War II, agricultural engineers developed new technologies to eliminate tasks traditionally done by women. In the 1980s, the process of defeminization accelerated as growers began to hire male guestworkers from Mexico as more women moved into the non-farm labor market to supplement their families' farm incomes. The transition from family to wage labor in the tobacco South was far from a 'natural' process, but one nurtured by state agricultural, labor, and immigration policy.

For more than three centuries, little American tobacco made it from seed to market without first passing through a woman's hands. In the seventeenth century, European women toiled alongside men as indentured servants. Enslaved African women replaced them by the eighteenth century, and their daughters planted, weeded, suckered, wormed, cut, cured, and stripped tobacco after them until emancipation. The most profound change in women's tobacco work, however, came as tobacco production shifted to smaller farms dependent on family labor in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The number of women working in the fields multiplied as white women and black women took to the fields in support of their families.

At the same time, women's activities in the tobacco economy extended beyond the fields: many controlled their own tobacco patches, helped sell their families' tobacco at auction, and, in numerous cases, managed their families' finances. As sociologist Margaret Jarman Hagood put it in 1939, tobacco farm women 'have an active interest in the farms and crops often exceeding that in the home' [ Hagood , 1939: 77].

At the dawn of the twenty-first century, however, very few women work in the tobacco fields of the American South. Increasingly, machines and male Mexican workers have taken their place. There is little way to measure women's disappearance definitively, but some figures are suggestive. In 2002, women operated 5 percent of the nation's roughly 57,000 tobacco farms. Ten years earlier, they operated 6.2 percent of the nation's nearly 125,000 tobacco farms. Their decline in real numbers is even more striking. In 2002, women operated 63 percent fewer tobacco farms than a decade earlier. 1 Missing from these numbers is any measurement of the decline in the amount of work done by hired female workers and, more critically, unpaid women family members and neighbors. No one has accurately counted the number of women tobacco workers in the fields today and little historical accounting of women in the tobacco fields exists beyond the passing words of government reports, the impressionistic accounts of outside observers, and memories of those who worked the farms. Nevertheless, it is fair to say that today male workers dominate tobacco agriculture to a greater extent than at any other time in American history.

The disappearance of women in the tobacco workforce can be explained in part by reference to larger changes in American tobacco agriculture. The expansion of tobacco production internationally, especially in China and Brazil, has placed downward pressure on the price of tobacco. While the U.S. government's tobacco program had guaranteed growers minimum prices in exchange for limiting production since the 1930s (Congress ended the program in 2004), the volume of lower-priced tobacco from international sources required the program's managers to repeatedly reduce the amount of tobacco growers could market to keep the program in balance. Unable to produce enough tobacco to make a profit, thousands of growers simply gave up the crop and leased their marketing allotments - effectively the licenses necessary to sell tobacco at auction - to growers eager to expand their farms. The number of tobacco farms has fallen precipitously, from more than a halfmillion in 1949, to less than sixty thousand in 2002. Such demographic collapse alone has meant a vast reduction in the number of women and men working in tobacco. Those farms that have survived are also different in character. Where once nearly all fit the ideal of the commercially-oriented family farm, with each family providing the bulk of the labor, most now rely on hired workers to get the crops through the season. At the same time, new

technologies have eliminated or simplified tasks associated with raising and marketing a crop of tobacco. This has made tobacco work more seasonal and thus reduced the need for workers on the farm all year round. In response, those farm families that still grow tobacco often rely on 'public work' in the non-farm sector.

What is less clear is why such a reduction has taken women away from tobacco work at a faster rate than men. It is certain that structural changes in the economies of numerous crops have affected women to a greater extent than men, but the disappearance of women's work should not been seen as a natural or inevitable result of these changes. Instead, it is critical to explain how and why these changes affected women more than men. This is important because the disappearance of women from the tobacco workforce is not simply an unfortunate side-effect of the American South's agricultural modernization, but a central component of its design. Two developments have largely caused the decline of women in tobacco: the mechanization or elimination of many traditional tasks and the increased use of hired labor, especially foreign 'guest workers' through the federal government's H-2A (formerly, H2) farm labor program, by the region's male farmers. Beginning in the 1950s, corporate, university, and state agricultural engineers, believing that many of the hand-tasks associated with tobacco agriculture were inefficiencies to be overcome, developed new technologies that mechanized many tasks traditionally seen as 'women's work'. Convinced of the value, farm families purchased these new tools and sent their sons and, especially, their daughters off the farm to work in the region's factories or its growing service sector. In the 1980s, the process of defeminization further gained steam as growers increasingly turned to the federal H-2A farm labor program to import workers from Mexico to do the work of growing tobacco. The replacement of unpaid female workers with hired H-2A workers, almost all of whom are men, was central to the reorientation of southern agricultural work from family to wage labor in the twentieth century. The disappearance of the South's farm women was far from a 'natural' process, but one nurtured by state agricultural, labor, and immigration policy.

## ' WOMEN'S WORK' IN THE TOBACCO SOUTH

Southern farmers grow numerous 'types' of tobacco, each of which is distinguished by the agricultural practices followed to create it and the market on which it is sold. These 'types' are products of history and generally follow geographical patterns (see Figure 1). Two types are dominant. Farmers in Kentucky, Tennessee, and western North Carolina and Virginia grow burley tobacco, an air-cured variety that is used in the chewing tobacco and cigarette trades, while growers from the southern Virginia Piedmont to Georgia and

FIGURE 1: TOBACCO PRODUCTION IN THE AMERICAN SOUTH IS DIVIDED INTO A NUMBER OF SUB-REGIONS, EACH DEFINED LARGELY BY THE TYPE OF TOBACCO GROWN THERE Source : H. Frederick Gale, Jr., Linda Foreman, and Thomas Capeheart, 'Tobacco and the Economy: Farms, Jobs, and Communities,' Agricultural Economic Research Report No. 789 (Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, 2000), Appendix 2.

<!-- image -->

even Florida grow 'bright' or flue-cured tobacco, a heat-cured variety that is most popular in the cigarette trade. (It is from this second area that this essay will draw most of its evidence, but its conclusions apply broadly to the rest of the South.) The dimensions of these regions are products of numerous factors including topography, soil characteristics, weather patterns, and, probably most important, historical development. The modern boundaries of each region are not identical to the historic range for each crop. Until the 1890s, for example, bright tobacco production was limited largely to northerly regions of its modern growing area in the Piedmont region of Virginia and North Carolina; it was only in the early twentieth century that farmers to the south, most of whom abandoned perennially low-priced cotton for the promise of higher-priced tobacco, took up the crop. (The migration of bright tobacco agriculture was halted only in the 1930s when federal legislation introduced as part of the New Deal agricultural reforms froze the growing areas of all types of tobacco to the counties where they were practiced between 1930 and 1932.) Each type of tobacco agriculture has its own practices, techniques, and equipment - barns for curing burley tobacco, for example, are completely different from those used for bright tobacco -but each shares some basic steps. Historically, completing these steps has been done in numerous ways, so it is best to deal with them abstractly at this point. Specific changes to each task over time are at the core of this essay's argument.

Tobacco seeds are smaller than poppy seeds, so they are first sewn in a seed bed and allowed to grow into seedlings. Once large enough, seedlings are transplanted to the fields and planted in pre-tilled rows in which soil is hilled around the seedling. Once 'on the hill', the tobacco is watched closely -dead plants are replaced quickly -and weeds are chopped repeatedly. Once the plants are of sufficient size, farmers remove each plant's terminal bud (flower), a process known as 'topping', in order to concentrate plant growth in the leaves. Removal of its reproductive capacities spurs the plant to produce ancillary buds known commonly as 'suckers' under the leaves. Farmers combined 'suckering', or the practice of carefully removing these buds by hand, with the task of manually removing tobacco horn worms ('worming'). Combined, they made for a hot summer's work.

Once ripe, tobacco had to be harvested and cured for market. Tobacco type determined the method, or vice versa, depending on one's perspective. In burley and most other crops, workers cut down each plant, stacked them in sheaves, and then hung the plants in slatted barns that allowed the air to dry the leaves. Workers in bright tobacco, conversely, picked ('primed') each leaf off a plant as it became ripe. Starting at the bottom of each plant, they repeatedly primed the plants until they left nothing but stalks standing in the fields. They cured the leaves as they harvested them by hanging the leaves in barns heated, depending on the time period and location, by charcoal, flues attached to wood fires, oil burners, or electric heaters. Time-critical in nature because of raw tobacco's relative fragility and the need to use barns as efficiently as possible, harvest and curing time was the most hectic period in an already time-consuming tobacco season.

Preparations for market followed curing. Until the last decade or so, farm families sold their crops at auction, where buyers representing various manufacturers measured a crop not only by its weight but by criteria such as color, thickness, and texture as well. Families took a great deal of care preparing their crops for the auction floor. They sorted (graded) their leaves by quality, tied them into bundles called hands, and stacked them neatly in piles. (In earlier years, stripping the leaves of their middle stems sometimes preceded sorting, making yet another task.) Stories of families losing money with improperly sorted tobacco haunted farmers, so successful completion of these last tasks was as important as the first. The end of the tobacco season did not leave much time for celebration or commiseration, however; ripening food crops, winter planting, and preparations for another tobacco season demanded the immediate attention of most families. It was not without reason that tobacco was commonly called a 'thirteen-month crop' [ Tilley , 1948: 37-88].

Southern growers have slaked tobacco's persistent thirst for human sweat in numerous ways since introducing it as a staple crop in the early seventeenth century. They first relied on the unfree labor of indentured

servants, then that of enslaved Africans and African Americans, and then that of their own families. Whatever the labor arrangement, women have been at its center. However, the status of the women doing the work and the nature of the work being done changed with the shifting order of tobacco agriculture. At different times and in different places, women did all of the tasks necessary for growing tobacco, yet certain tasks have generally fallen to women while others have been largely limited to men. Few women, for example, plowed fields or climbed up to the tops of barns to house tobacco for curing. Growers and farm families often justified gendered labor divisions by naturalizing certain characteristics needed for various jobs - strong backs made men fit for plowing while women's discerning eyesight made them better at grading - but the need to combine culturally-specific gender roles childrearing, for example - with farm labor more often defined who did what. However, all boundaries could be broken when tobacco called.

Starved for labor, Virginia planters placed female indentured servants in the tobacco fields alongside their male workers in the early seventeenth century. Their numbers were limited, however, and it is unclear the extent to which planters thought they could serve as a viable workforce. They had no such qualms about black women working in the fields. As planters made the transition to slave labor forces in the mid- and late seventeenth century, they worked slave women alongside slave men with little second thought. As historian Lorena S. Walsh [1993: 177-8] has explained, 'Men and women toiled together at the same tasks in a single work group, and work requirements were the same for both sexes. When rating laborers as full or partial hands, planters made allowances for youth, disability, or advanced age but made no distinctions by sex'. As the tobacco plantation complex became more complex in the eighteenth century, opening skilled positions for slave men, slave women's work became even more important in the fields. And, as Brenda E. Stevenson [1996: 192] has shown, their increasing work in the fields came on top of the other tasks culture and nature bound on them as women: 'spinning, weaving, nursing, and cooking . . . to say nothing of the child care and domestic work they did in the quarters'. 'Use to wuk fum sun to sun in dat old terbaccy field', eighty-six year old former slave Henrietta Perry recalled of her time working tobacco years after emancipation. 'Wuk till my back felt lak it ready to pop in two' [ Perdue et al. , 1976: 223].

Tobacco planters generally organized their slaves into gangs whose labor either the planter himself or, more commonly, an overseer watched closely. Simon Stokes remembered one overseer on his master's plantation as being especially harsh. '[H]e hed hawk eyes fer seein' de worms on de terbaccer, so yo' sho' hed ter git dem all, or you'd habe ter bite all de worms dat yo' miss into, or git three lashes on yo' back wid his ole lash' [ Perdue et al. , 1976: 281]. Their sex failed to shield female slaves from similar treatment.

Henrietta Perry remembered her master inflicting punishments similar to those used by Stokes' master. '[U]s black people had to look arter that 'baccy lak it was gold. Us women had to pin our dresses up aroundst our necks fo' we stepped in dat ole 'baccy fiel', else we'd git a lashin'. Git a lashin' too effen you cut a leaf fo' it[']s ripe' [ Perdue et al. , 1976: 223-4]. In this system, slave women's work differed little from that of men and there was little sexual division of labor. They were, with some exceptions, simply hands in the fields; the sex of the hands' owners mattered little to most planters so long as those hands raised tobacco right.

With emancipation in 1865, planters lost ownership of these hands. Nevertheless they struggled to control them. The conflicts inherent in reorganizing labor in the post-emancipation Tobacco South have been ably documented [ Edwards , 1997; Holt , 2000; Kerr-Ritchie , 1999; Morgan , 1992; Shifflett , 1982]. While complex, these conflicts hinged on the extent of control planters could exert over the labor and lives of freedpeople. They involved not only former slaves and their former masters, but also, for a brief but critical moment in the immediate wake of the emancipation, federal authorities charged with reordering economic and political life in the postwar and post-emancipation South. Freedpeople, for their part, prized independence from white oversight and most sought access to land to achieve this. That most found only limited success in this speaks not only to their overwhelming poverty but also to the extent to which white landowners retained control over both land and local economies. Landowners understood that a black labor force with the means to survive independently meant there would be fewer hands to work tobacco and did all they could to maintain ties of patronage and dependency with freedpeople, even those who found access to land. Federal agents of the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands (commonly known as the Freedmen's Bureau) -mostly educated northerners with a dedication to the ideals of a free labor market - were all too willing to side with landowners in this struggle because of the orderliness the return of former slaves to the fields as hired workers seemed to promise for labor relations.

No one in the tobacco south held a monopoly of power in this struggle. Unlike in other plantation areas, most notably the Deep South's cotton belts, many planters in Virginia and North Carolina lacked the ability - or the will, in some cases - to reconstitute the plantation model with free workers. Some, like North Carolina planter A.J. Hester, found it nearly impossible to get freedpeople to obey the system of bells he installed to order the workday. 'The Negroes were prejudiced to this system', an observer explained, because it 'looked too much like slavery' [ Raleigh Farmer and Mechanic , 1880]. They, instead, demanded that Hester rent the land to them for a share of the crop, something he did only grudgingly and on land he could watch closely.

Others were able to find freedpeople with access to land or other means of self-support willing to work for wages but not as tenants. Over time, a complex patchwork of labor arrangements reflecting local conditions arose. Former slaves rushed to obtain land of their own, worked on shares, hired themselves out as day laborers, or practiced some combination of these arrangements. The experience of Sampson White of Pittsylvania County, Virginia, did not so much typify that of most freedpeople as illustrate the complexity of the world they made with former planters. As White put it in 1911, 'I work land of my own and rent land and rent out land to others' [ KerrRitchie , 1999: 255].

Control of women's labor was at the center of the reorganization of tobacco work in the late nineteenth century. Freedwomen, like freedmen, wrestled with white planters to control their labor. Some worked for wages, a few worked on shares on their own, and still fewer purchased land of their own, but most, especially married women and younger women, increasingly centered their productive energies at home, whether they lived on their own or rented land. As they sought to become more independent, black men sought to limit the hired work of wives and daughters and channel it to their own needs. This, no doubt, could be a source of conflict within families, but it is clear that black families came to rely on the unpaid labor of women and children in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to grow their tobacco [ Holt , 2000: passim].

At the same time, the entrance of small, yeoman white farmers into the tobacco economy expanded the number of white women working in the tobacco fields and around the curing barns. White farm families had operated small farms on the periphery of the tobacco plantation belt since the eighteenth century. Most practiced subsistence agriculture or at least had only limited connections to the market. They often grew tobacco, but rarely for market. High demand for bright tobacco, the entreaties of boosters eager to expand the numerous market and manufacturing towns that sprang up as railroads crisscrossed the North Carolina-Virginia Piedmont, and most important, the expansion of the crop lien system drove these farmers to begin producing for market [ Wright , 1986: 110-114]. Lacking hard cash or access to bank credit, growers who wished to purchase supplies of any sort increasingly turned to local merchants for credit. As security for the loans usually made in goods instead of cash - merchants placed liens on growers' crops, and since tobacco could not be eaten, did not rot, and could always sell on the market, they required growers to grow the golden leaf as a condition of the loan. This increasingly forced growers to concentrate their energies on tobacco production. They might earn enough to pay off their loans at the end of the season, but rarely made enough to start fresh the next year; most found themselves bound to the system. While no accounting of the number of

tobacco farms exists, the growth in the amount of tobacco marketed in these years offers a glimpse of the booming tobacco economy. Between the 1870s and the 1890s, for example, the amount of tobacco sold on the markets of Danville, Virginia - the largest tobacco market, located in the heart of the Piedmont - more than doubled. 2 By the turn of the twentieth century, it seemed that nearly every farm in the Piedmont was a tobacco farm.

The crop lien both reflected the growing diffusion of tobacco production to individual households and intensified the demands on families to provide their own labor. Where wealthy landowners might be able to finance their own crops or obtain credit on more favorable terms, small holders had nothing but their crop to offer as a guarantee. Once obligated by the lien, these small holders had to use every resource available to them to produce tobacco. For most, this meant heavier dependence on the unpaid labor of their wives and children. This was not without controversy. For some, it was evidence of debilitating effects of the crop lien and the monocrop agriculture it fostered. For most families, however, putting women to work was a matter of necessity. There are no statistics on the number of women working on the region's farms in this period, but much anecdotal evidence suggests that nearly every farm, large and small, operated by blacks or whites, sharecroppers or owners, depended to some extent on women's labor by the early twentieth century. Not all male farmers needed or wanted their wives and daughters to work in the fields, of course; being able to keep them out of the fields was, after all, a sign of economic success. Those lucky few with enough sons might keep their daughters out of the fields, but many if not most counted daughters as viable hands. Lillie Tart remembered that she and her mother and three sisters 'did all the work' on their North Carolina farm in the 1930s [ Barefoot , 1978: 102].

Tart's family aside, most farm families followed a sexual division of labor, one sensitive to age and experience. (Women who did not grow up on farms often did less than those who did.) While women certainly did all kinds of tobacco work at different times, families saw certain tasks as especially suited to women, usually because of their ability to combine them with household tasks. In the spring, older farm women oversaw their children pulling seedlings from seed beds for transplanting to the fields. In the summer, younger girls and boys chopped weeds and wormed and suckered tobacco, tasks women might also do if labor was short. At harvest, women's work revolved around the tobacco barns. Younger girls 'handed up' tobacco leaves to older sisters, mothers, and aunts for 'stringing' into small bundles on sticks that would be placed in the barns for curing. A number of women, often neighbors or extended kin, might work at this task together, sharing not only stories and neighborhood gossip, but also the responsibility of preparing lunch for the men in the fields [ Bennett , 2006: 69-78]. After the leaves were

cured, women stripped them from the sticks, graded, and bundled them for market. 'I'd grade tobacco all day long and pack it down', one North Carolina woman recalled. 'Then we'd tie it at night. You see, the pack house was right here at us, and the young 'uns could stay at the house. That's the way we made our living' [ Phillips , 1990: 134]. This pattern continued for generations; women raised in tobacco in the 1950s and 1960s recalled doing many of the same tasks [ Childress , 2002: passim].

Patriarchy was strong on southern tobacco farms, as was common throughout the region. Law and custom dictated that fathers exerted final say over a family's crop and its labor. One woman revealed the extent to which this remained true well into the 1970s when she recalled her desire to quit planting early one day so that she and her sister could attend a high school dance. 'Daddy would not let us leave early to get dressed', she remembered. 'We were so mad but couldn't show our anger. Mama saw and felt our anguish, but was also powerless' [ Childress , 2002: 27]. Nevertheless, farm women often retained control over not only their own labor and that of their children. Fathers, Margaret Jarman Hagood found, often deferred to women's authority over what they deemed women's work. 'In the striphouse . . . the mother is often the star performer, the chief grader', she explained. 'Although the husband does the directing, decides what lots are to be worked next,

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 2: BOTH BLACK AND WHITE WOMEN WORKED IN TOBACCO Left : Woman planting tobacco with transplanting peg in hand, Orange County, North Carolina, 1940; Right : Woman helping neighbors plant tobacco, Durham County, North Carolina, 1940. Source : Library of Congress.

<!-- image -->

assigns tasks to the children, he is usually somewhat respectful of his wife's ability' [ Hagood , 1939: 88]. Many women and girls also controlled their own portions of the crops following a common practice - subject to a father's whims, of course - of dividing a family's crop to reward hard work during the year.

For many farm women, tobacco was not only what they grew, but a source of identity. Despite the physical pain they endured from the repetitive tasks they did, many spoke proudly of being raised working in tobacco. Younger women boasted of their ability to keep up with brothers; middle-aged women spoke of how their fathers 'lost their best hands' when they married; older women longed for days when they could still work in the fields [ Hagood , 1939: 89]. Work in the fields shaped these women's intimate relationship with tobacco. Not all farm women shared this appreciation for tobacco work, of course, but the feeling was a common one among both white and black women who worked in tobacco. While it is hard to say why they felt this way, it is certain that many understood the critical function their work served in securing their families' existence.

## MAKING WOMEN'S LABOR OBSOLETE

The agricultural economists, engineers, and policy makers who surveyed tobacco agriculture beginning in 1920s had a different view of women's work. Where farm women saw their work as critical to getting tobacco through the season, these observers believed that tasks such as suckering or tying sapped energies that might be put to better use. Their point was not without merit: these tasks sucked in vast amounts of labor. In 1922, agricultural economists estimated that families on bright tobacco farms spent two-thirds of their work hours tending tobacco, putting in upwards of 430 man hours of labor per acre [ Records of the Office of the Secretary of Agriculture , 1922]. Unlike cotton or grain crops, tobacco offered no summer lay-by period and preparations for market kept many families working late into the night during the autumn.

The acreage cuts that accompanied the New Deal's Agricultural Adjustment Acts ironically made the labor situation even more difficult for farm families. 3 Less acreage meant less work to be done, of course, but workload reductions came unevenly. Fewer acres might reduce the amount of time or people needed to plow by one factor but not reduce more laborintensive and time-dependent tasks like harvesting at the same amount. The problem for farm families arose when children whose labor was no longer needed year round left the farm to find non-farm jobs; one less son or daughter in the summer was no great loss, but one less son or daughter at the harvest could spell trouble for a family. The widespread rural exodus caused

by World War II, when millions left the land to serve in the military or fill higher-paying industrial jobs, only made the problem of getting enough workers in the busiest seasons more acute. The postwar years brought no respite from wartime upheavals that loosed the demographic, economic, and cultural underpinnings of the family labor system on which so many tobacco farms had relied. Tied to a form of agriculture dependent on human sweat, tobacco growers discovered that the methods for providing it - most notably family labor, but also neighborhood work swaps and the hiring of local day laborers - were increasingly unreliable [ Bennett , 2005: 125-138].

Tobacco farmers were not alone in this situation, of course, but the solutions other agriculturalists turned to in the postwar years, most notably, mechanization, offered little for those on tobacco farms. The techniques growers used to harvest and prepare tobacco for market, especially, posed a problem. Since the value of tobacco depended on both the quantity and quality of the leaves, harvesting required discernment and care on the part of the person picking them from the plants. Mechanical harvesters that pulled leaves indiscriminately, in other words, were out of the question. Much the same was true for the process of tying leaves into hands: unless the market shifted to allow for the sale of untied tobacco - as it did in the late 1960s there was little way to make the process less labor intensive. Agricultural engineers and federal extension agents did not ignore the potential of developing mechanical harvesters or more efficient curing processes, but found themselves limited by the historically-rooted demands of the tobacco market [ Daniel , 1985: chapter 12].

They did, however, find other ways to reduce the labor needed at other points in the tobacco season. Beginning in the late 1940s, a number of new technologies aimed at simplifying or eliminating those tasks government and industry experts identified as inefficient emerged from university, government, and tobacco-industry laboratories. Taking these tools in order of their use during the tobacco season (rather than by their dates of invention) makes clear the connection between technological development and the reorientation of women's traditional tasks. Seed beds, traditionally grown on a freshlyburned plot of ground, moved to greenhouses, where the seedling sprouted in trays that required no pulling or sorting or mother's oversight before transplanting. Tractor-pulled mechanical transplanting machines replaced the hand techniques - digging a hole in the ground with a peg had been common for centuries before the first hand-operated transplanters appeared in the early twentieth century - that had taken so much time in earlier years. Rather than hauling plants and water to the fields, children and women now rode through the fields, placing (dropping) plants into the machine that placed them at preset intervals and doused them with the proper amount of water. Neither of these innovations took women out of the fields immediately - riding on the

transplanting machine, in fact, became a new type of women's work on many farms - but each reduced the amount of time they worked in the fields and, more importantly, reduced the level of control farm women had over the tasks they did in the planting seasons [ Grise et al. , 1975: 20-22].

A vast array of chemicals altered women's summer work in equally profound ways. As Edmund Russell [2001: chapter 9] and Pete Daniel [2000: chapter 4; and 2005: passim] have shown, government and industry experts saw weeds and insects as pernicious impediments to agricultural efficiency best defeated by an all-out chemical blitz. Together they tried to convince growers of the economic benefits (and ecological benignity) of a raft of new concoctions. A 1950s-era advertisement from the American Tobacco Company [undated] gives some idea of the alphabet soup of synthetic chemicals tobacco growers had available to limit insects alone: DDT, parathion, TEPP, TDE, endrine, chlordane, and more. In 1952, one county extension agent, who was employed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture to teach farmers of the benefits of new technologies, reported that farmers in his region 'buy these materials now with the same assurance that they have purchased fertilizer for many years' [ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Federal Extension Service , 1952].

Farmers jumped even faster for the sucker-removing chemicals that became available after World War II. In 1946, agricultural engineers discovered that an existing chemical called maleic hydrazide could remove suckers without significantly damaging the rest of the plant. 4 Extension agents began promoting the chemical, marketed as MH-30, to farmers in the early 1950s; by the early 1960s, so many farm families relied on it that one grower exclaimed, 'If you told me to go anywhere flue-cured tobacco is grown in this country to find a grower that does not use MH-30, I wouldn't know where to find him' [ Greensboro Daily News , 1962]. Growers adopted chemicals like these because of labor savings they represented. Whatever the negative effects the chemicals had on the workers who sprayed them - and these were many - they reduced the amount of time given to those tasks. Since these tasks had once been largely women's (and children's) work, the need for their labor declined as chemical use increased.

The greatest technological change farm women encountered in the postwar years came at the curing barns where their work had once been central. Here, engineers first tried to make their work faster and easier. In the 1950s, for example, they introduced looping machines designed to reduce the time women spent tying small bundles of leaves to the sticks used to hang them in the curing barns. More critical, however, was a change in the federal tobacco marketing laws that eliminated the requirement that families tie their tobacco into hands after curing and before sale. 5 Pressed by the time-consuming nature of the task, in the 1960s farmers pressured the federal government to

allow sales of untied tobacco. In 1968, after receiving assurances from manufacturers that they would alter their manufacturing processes, which were designed to handle tied tobacco, to accept untied tobacco, it did by providing the same price supports for tied and untied tobacco. Predictably, farm families soon flooded markets with piles of untied tobacco, leading to a revolution on not only the warehouse floors, but back on the farm as well. Relieved of the need to care for each leaf as they had before - they still sorted the tobacco by grade, but gave decreasing attention to the quality of each leaf - farm families purchased more bulk curing barns that allowed them to simply pile their leaves into racks that they then loaded into the house-trailershaped barns. No longer did girls carefully hand up leaves for tying; no longer did mothers spend long hours sorting and tying their money crop. Both, instead, piled their tobacco into trays for curing, dumped it on to burlap sacks or stuffed it into baling machines, and sent it along to market. The most obvious location of women's work became obsolete [ Bennett , 2005: 61-66].

In these very specific ways, technological innovations and state policy eliminated many of the sites of women's work in the Tobacco South, hastening the departure of women from the fields. They did not leave altogether, of course. Many women rode transplanters, sprayed chemicals, drove harvesters, and loaded and unloaded bulk barns. Nevertheless, by reducing the amount of what farm families saw as 'women's work', agricultural modernization placed more pressure on women to find other means of aiding their families.

## REPLACING FEMALE WORKERS WITH MALES

The arrival of new agricultural technologies both responded to ongoing alterations in and placed additional pressures on family-based agriculture. Charles K. Mann [1981: 38-40] has shown that the adoption of new technologies hastened the disappearance of tenants, especially sharecroppers, by making larger tobacco growers' labor needs more seasonal and thus enhancing the appeal of hiring work crews in peak seasons rather than families year-round. Sharecroppers did not suffer this fate alone, though; thousands of small farm landowning families also found that new tools made it more advantageous to have family members work more off the farm than on. Both situations reflected the reorganization or outright replacement of the family labor system that had emerged from the reorganization of agriculture in the post-emancipation South and marked tobacco agriculture since the late nineteenth century. As the family-operated farm waned as an institution in the Tobacco South, so too, did the place of women in tobacco.

A number of factors drove the decline of family labor in the post-World War II Tobacco South. Changes in the region's economy proved to be the

most powerful of these. As manufacturing and service industries expanded in the South, especially after 1950, they offered new opportunities for work, especially for women, off the farm. Millions of southerners simply left the land for better pay outside the South or in the region's mills, mines, and expanding cities. In some areas of the Tobacco South, most notably in the North Carolina-Virginia Piedmont, urban expansion paved over thousands of farms; in other areas, like eastern North Carolina and South Carolina, where nearby jobs were few, thousands simply left the land to find other opportunities [ Gregory , 2006]. One tobacco farmer's advice to his sons that 'the best crop you can grow on a farm is a 40-hour-a-week job in town', seemed to be the guiding principal for many in the region [ New York Times , 1990].

Federal tobacco policy also helped to create an environment that made keeping families on the land more difficult. The tobacco program's design caused much of the difficulty. Where a corporate ideology - most famously summed up by the dictum that farmers should 'get big or get out' - shaped most New Deal-era commodity programs, small farmers' demands that they be shielded from the pressure to consolidate production informed the development of the tobacco program. This gave the program two conflicting missions: keeping tobacco production within limits to prevent overproduction while fostering the health of thousands of small tobacco farms. Tobacco income, despite the best attempts of farm families to diversify, determined the fates of these farms. Faced with acreage limitations, farm families pushed each acre to produce more. 6 This, in turn, brought on greater reductions in allotments, creating a vicious cycle for many small farm families. Landowners who hired tenants released them when they could no longer provide enough acreage for them. At the same time, thousands of landowners gave up entirely and decided to rent their allotments - a practice made possible by a 1962 change to the program - to larger growers hungry for all the land they could get [ Bennett , 2005: chapter 4].

Larger growers needed the land to reach or maintain the economies of scale necessary to justify the expense of the new machines, greenhouses, chemicals, and bulk curing barns that allowed them to grow enough tobacco to make a living. Technology allowed them to move beyond the limits that the demands of hand-labor had placed on tobacco acreage, but it did not eliminate seasonal demands for labor, especially at harvest. Harvest time had always created the greatest demand for workers, but the disappearance of many traditional sources of labor -especially extended kin networks, neighbors, and local people willing to work by the day - created a new problem for growers [ Mann , 1981: 40]. Looking for workers, they first turned to the east coast migrant stream. Unlike fruit and vegetable growers from Florida to Maine, tobacco growers in Georgia, the Carolinas, and Virginia

rarely hired migrant workers before the 1960s. Many felt that migrant workers lacked the background and experience necessary to work in tobacco [ Bennett, 2005 : 140].

Labor shortages - or, better put, difficulty finding local workers willing to work in tobacco for low wages - forced them to abandon their conceit. Ascertaining the exact number of migrant workers employed by tobacco growers is difficult, but evidence suggests their presence was increasingly common after 1960. By the mid-1960s, three-quarters of Virginia and North Carolina tobacco farmers employed some sort of seasonal labor, often local workers, but increasingly migrant laborers [ U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service , 1972: 4-5]. By 1976, the North Carolina Employment Security Commission noted that an estimated 1,500 migrant workers had picked tobacco and other crops in the state's Piedmont counties alone; even more worked in North Carolina's coastal plain counties [ Durham Morning Herald , 1976]. Most of these migrant workers were Mexicans and Mexican-Americans, who increasingly displaced African American workers in the east coast migrant stream in the years following World War II [ Hahamovitch , 1997: 200-201]. Differences in ethnicity and language compounded the workers' status as outsiders and highlighted the shift away from the region's traditional personalized labor relations. The fact that the vast majority were men also meant that men increasingly did the field and barn work farm mothers and daughters had done for so long.

The transition to guestworkers in the 1980s and 1990s only increased the predominance of men in the tobacco workforce. In the 1980s and, especially, the 1990s, tobacco growers' reliance on migrant labor - legal and illegal waned as they turned to imported foreign farm laborers to work their fields. Commonly known as 'H-2 workers', (so-named because of the subsection of the U.S. immigration law allowing for their importation), these workers come to the United States through the auspices of state-level growers' associations that receive permits from the U.S. Department of Labor to import workers after certifying that they cannot get sufficient domestic labor. The program, which has its roots in the World War II emergency farm labor program, had since 1952 allowed the importation of seasonal farm workers from other countries - Jamaica and the Bahamas largely at first, and, later, Mexico [ Hahamovitch , 2001]. Tobacco growers had used the program during the war, but dropped out after when local labor conditions improved. Given a sufficient pool of local and migrant farm labor, they saw no need to bear the high costs of transporting and housing the workers. (Under the H-2 provision, growers have to pay the transportation costs of the workers and provide rentfree housing while on the farm.)

In 1980, however, Virginia tobacco growers turned to the H-2 program out of a desire to secure a more stable (and more pliable) labor force. Using the

administrative offices of two growers' associations that had been importing guestworkers for apple growers for decades, leading growers began importing farm workers, almost all from Mexico. By 1983, they had imported thousands of the seasonal workers, who came in time for spring planting and left shortly after the autumn harvest. Growers argued that these workers represented a source of stability that they could not find by relying on local or migrant laborers. Pittsylvania County grower Tommie Willis, according to a report in the Washington Post [1983], spoke of them as 'insurance', and claimed having them on his farm saved him the headaches of rounding up enough labor for his crops. 'You don't have workers when you need them unless you get Mexicans', he explained. North Carolina farmers began to import foreign guest workers through the foreign labor program (known since 1986 as the H2-A program in reflection of its recodification in that year's Immigration Reform and Control Act) a decade later, and by 1997 had become the largest importing state of H-2A farm labor, much of it in the tobacco fields. In 1999, a quarter of all H-2A certification permits were given to North Carolina growers; Virginia ranked third in the number of permits issued that year (Nationwide, work in tobacco accounted for 42 percent of all H-2A certifications, double the next job category, vegetable harvesting.) [ Wasem and Colliver , 2001]. Like their Virginia neighbors, they justified use of the program in similar terms. 'We began using the H-2A program in 1993 after we had increasing problems recruiting workers who had been legalized by the 1986 immigration bill's amnesty program', one Guilford County grower explained. 'We made the decision to go with the migrant workforce because our local labor had disappeared. So that is why we are in the H-2A program now. Our migrant labor, local migrant labor is disappearing also' [ United States Congress , 1997: 9-10, 7].

Because of a combination of the demands of U.S. growers and the decisions of families in Mexico, nearly all guestworkers in tobacco are men. In the tobacco fields, they do many of the same jobs farm families had done except without the boundaries of the sexual division of labor that had guided family work. While, as anthropologist David Griffith [2006: 185] has shown, it is not uncommon for Mexican families to send several members to work in the U.S. and for kin networks play a role in placement, the conditions under which guestworkers toil in no way resembles the family-oriented labor of sharecroppers and other tenants. Instead, their situation more closely resembles that of tobacco workers in colonial Zimbabwe: hired for the season; paid by the day; housed away on the farm; easily dismissed; and subject to the discipline of the landowner [ Rubert , 1998: chapters 5 and 6]. They labor somewhere in the twilight between free wage labor and unfree contract labor. They cannot negotiate wages, set their working conditions, or even decide to leave one employer for another. To be sure, they are not

FIGURE 3: MEN AND CHEMICALS NOW DO MUCH OF THE WORK ONCE DONE BY WOMEN Source : Farm Labor Organizing Committee.

<!-- image -->

indentured servants (they cannot stay once they have completed their contracts) nor are they chattel slaves (although some growers have faced charges of slavery over the years), but their employment and working conditions resemble those of tobacco's early years more than those that arose in the wake of emancipation.

## CONCLUSION

The predominance of guestworkers and other wage laborers in the tobacco fields of the contemporary American South reveal the extent to which technological change and state policy have combined over the past half

century to largely eliminate women from tobacco agriculture. The process of rationalizing tobacco agriculture was not necessarily gender-biased in its origins, but neither was it gender-neutral. Few bore the brunt of the social and cultural dislocations of agricultural modernization more closely than farm women as their work moved from the center of the tobacco economy to its periphery to near exclusion. This is not to say that their work no longer matters; indeed, the wages and health insurance many earn off the farm help to keep their husbands and sons in the farming business.

Nevertheless, the declining presence of women's on-farm work illustrates not only the differential effects of modernization, but also the distinctiveness of the model of tobacco agriculture that dominated the American South from emancipation until the mid-twentieth century. Families - white and black, tenants and landowners - formed the backbone of the labor force in these years. Most, especially tenants, depended on the unpaid labor of farm women and children. While tenants might technically work for a wage - their share of the crop at the end of the year - their dependence on the entire family determined that they did so within the framework of the household, not as individual proletarians. Wage labor certainly existed, but most often only as an adjunct to family labor, both that of the hired hand (who used wages to augment family income) and the one doing the hiring (who used the labor alongside that of family workers). Women's work before this organization of labor and in recent years demonstrates the extent to which tobacco agriculture changed.

Women's changing work patterns also illustrate the fragility and tenuousness of the order of southern rural life in the twentieth century. The centrality of family labor lasted only about a century in the Tobacco South, a much shorter period of time than the plantation that came before it and, while it is never wise to try to predict the future, likely a shorter time than the neoplantation that has come to replace it. Despite this, the linkage of tobacco and family farming remains strong on Tobacco Road, where it has remained a powerful political tool. But the linkage is a weak one at best, forged only by the contingency of history, the collision of a number of historical processes at just the right moment. That moment, to the chagrin of many, appears to be passing, and, as the history of women's work shows, the bond may never be mended.

## NOTES

all tobacco farms irrespective of the type of tobacco grown or the states in which the farms were located. All figures compiled from U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2002 Census of Agriculture: Volume 1: U.S. National Level Data , Tables 1 and 48 and U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1992 Census of Agriculture : Volume 1: National Level Data , Tables 1 and 17.

- 2. Between 1869 and 1879, farmers sold an average of roughly 18.4 million pounds annually in Danville. Between 1889 and 1899, they averaged 43.4 million pounds per year [ Danville Tobacco Association President's Report , 1984 6-9]. :
- 3. The Supreme Court invalidated the first Agricultural Adjustment Act in 1936. Congress, however, created an emergency program to maintain the price supports growers received under the program in response and, in 1938, passed a new Agricultural Adjustment Act that provided the framework for the tobacco program that remained in place until 2004. For the purposes at hand, the legal framework is less important than the limits the program placed on farm families. For a history of the program's founding and early implementation see Badger [1980], passim, and Daniel [1985, chapter 6].
- 4. The actual extent to which MH-30 damaged the leaves was a subject of heated debate between growers and tobacco manufacturers from the 1950s to the 1970s. Tobacco companies argued the chemical damaged the chemical composition of the plants; farmers, meanwhile, argued the damage claims were overblown and demanded that the labor-saving value of MH-30 outweighed whatever damage it might do. The federal government, because of its oversight of the federal tobacco program, tried to mediate the dispute but ultimately found farmers' protests to Congress prevented any limitations or ban on the use of the chemical [ Bennett , 2005: 167-176].
- 5. As part of the evolution of the federal tobacco program during World War II, the federal government became something of a buyer of last resort for tobacco farmers whose tobacco did not bring the minimum - or parity - prices promised to growers for participation in the program. Using funds from the federal government's Commodity Credit Corporation, tobacco-grower cooperatives purchased the unsold leaf at parity and then processed the leaf for resale to manufacturers at a later date. Most manufacturers' processing plants were arranged to process only 'tied' tobacco, so the cooperatives dictated that only tied tobacco would receive parity prices, essentially forcing growers to continue to tie their tobacco into hands.
- 6. The tobacco program initially set limits on the number of acres of tobacco each farm could produce. The development of new chemicals and new plant varieties quickly increased growers' yields. By the late 1950s, it was clear that increasing yields were undoing the benefits of limiting acreage. In 1965, the federal government changed the allotment system from acreage only to an acreage-poundage formula. Implementation of the new allotment system created a hardship on many small growers [ Bennett , 2005: 74-75].

## REFERENCES

American Tobacco Company, undated, Producing Finer Flue Cured Tobacco , John H. Hager Papers, Box 2, Folder 23, Virginia Historical Society, Richmond, Va.

Badger, Anthony J., 1980, Prosperity Road: The New Deal, Tobacco, and North Carolina , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Barefoot, Pamela, 1978, Mules &amp; Memories: A Photo Documentary of the Tobacco Farmer, with chapter introductions by Burt Kornegay, Winston-Salem, N.C.: John F. Blair.

Bennett, Evan P., 2005, 'King Bacca's Throne: Land, Labor, and Life in the Old Bright Belt since 1880', Ph.D. Dissertation: The College of William &amp; Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia.

Bennett, Evan P., 2006, '''A Responsibility on Women That Cannot Be Delegated to Father, Husband, or Son'': Farm Women and Cooperation in the Tobacco South', in Melissa Walker and Rebecca Sharpless (eds), Work, Family and Faith: Rural Southern Women in the Twentieth Century , Columbia: University of Missouri Press.

Childress, Linda Hamlett, 2002, A Tobacco Farmer's Daughter , n.p.: 1 st Books.

Daniel, Pete, 1985, Breaking the Land: The Transformation of Cotton, Tobacco, and Rice Cultures since 1880 , Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Daniel, Pete, 2000, Lost Revolutions: The South in the 1950s , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Daniel, Pete, 2005, Toxic Drift: Pesticides and Health in the Post-World War II South , Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

Danville Tobacco Association President's Report, 1984, Danville Tobacco Association Records, 1878-1984, Library of Virginia, Richmond, Virginia.

Durham Morning Herald

,

1976, 'Farmers Count More on Migrant Laborers', 11 August.

Edwards, Laura, 1997, Gendered Strife and Confusion: The Political Culture of Reconstruction , Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Greensboro Daily News , 1962, 'Governor's Proposal Favored', 27 November.

Gregory, James N., 2006, The Southern Diaspora: How the Great Migrations of Black and White Southerners Transformed America , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Griffith, David, 2006, American Guestworkers: Jamaicans and Mexicans in the U.S. Labor Market , University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.

Grise, Verner N., et al., 1975, Structural Characteristics of Flue-Cured Tobacco Farms and Prospects for Mechanization, Agricultural , Economic Report No. 277, United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Hagood, Margaret Jarman, 1939, Mothers of the South: Portraiture of the White Tenant Farm Woman , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Hahamovitch, Cindy, 1997, The Fruits of Their Labor: Atlantic Coast Farmworkers and the Making of Migrant Poverty, 1870-1945 , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. Hahamovitch, Cindy, 2001, '''In America Life is Given Away'': Jamaican Farmworkers and the Making of Agricultural Immigration Policy,' in Catherine McNichol Stock and Robert D. Johnston, (eds) The Countryside in the Age of the Modern State: Political Histories of Modern America , Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Holt, Sharon Ann, 2000, Making Freedom Pay: North Carolina Freedpeople Working for Themselves , Athens: University of Georgia Press.

Kerr-Ritchie, Jeffrey R., 1999, Freedpeople in the Tobacco South: Virginia, 1860-1900 , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Mann, Charles K., 1981, 'The Tobacco Franchise for Whom?' in William R. Finger (ed.), The Tobacco Industry in Transition: Policies for the 1980s , Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. Morgan, Lynda, 1992, Emancipation in Virginia's Tobacco Belt, 1850-1870 , Athens: University of Georgia Press.

Perdue, Charles, et al., 1976, Weevils in the Wheat: Interviews with Virginia Ex-Slaves , Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Phillips, Anne Radford, 1990, 'Farm Women of Stokes County, North Carolina, and the Production of Flue-Cured Tobacco, 1925-1955: Continuity and Change', Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Maryland, College Park.

Raleigh Farmer and Mechanic , 1880, untitled newspaper article, April 1 edition.

Records of the Office of the Secretary of Agriculture, 1922, 'Resume of the Attached Preliminary Report on Cost of Virginia Dark Fire-Cured and Bright Tobacco for 1922', Record Group 16, General Correspondence of the Office of the Secretary of Agriculture, Box 1028, National Archives, College Park, Maryland.

Rubert, Steven C., 1998, A Most Promising Weed: A History of Tobacco Farming and Labor in Colonial Zimbabwe, 1890-1945 , Athens: Ohio University Press.

Russell, Edmund, 2001, War and Nature: Fighting Humans and Insects with Chemicals from World War I to Silent Spring , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Shifflett, Crandall A., 1982, Patronage and Poverty in the Tobacco South: Louisa County, Virginia, 1860-1900 , Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.

Stevenson, Brenda E., 1996, Life in Black &amp; White: Family and Community in the Slave South , New York: Oxford University Press.

The New York Times , 1990, 'Embattled Tobacco Still Pays the Bills', 28 March, A12. Tilley, Nannie May, 1948, The Bright-Tobacco Industry, 1860-1929 , Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

United States Department of Agriculture, 1992, Census of Agriculture , Washington D.C.

United States Department of Agriculture, 2002, Census of Agriculture , Washington D.C.

United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service, 1972, Direct and Contract Hiring of Seasonal Farm Labor , Statistical Bulletin No. 478, Washington D.C.

United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service, 1952, 'Report of the County Agent, 1952: Person County, N.C.', Extension Service Annual Narrative and Statistical Reports, North Carolina, Box 277, Record Group 33, National Archives, College Park, Md.

United States Congress, House of Representatives, Field Hearing on Issues Relating to Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Workers and their Employers , Hearing before the Subcommittee on Workforce Protections of the Committee on Education and Workforce, House of Representatives, 12 September 1997, Newland, North Carolina.

Walsh, Lorena S., 1993, 'Slave Life, Slave Society, and Tobacco Production in the Tidewater Chesapeake, 1620-1820', in Ira Berlin and Philip D. Morgan (eds), Cultivation and Culture: Labor and the Shaping of Slave Life in the Americas , Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Washington Post , 23 May 1983.

Wasem, Ruth Ellen and Geoffrey K. Colliver, 'Immigration of Agricultural Guest Workers: Policy, Trends, and Legislative Issues', Congressional Research Service Report, RL30852, February 15, 2001, available at: http://www.ncseonline.org/NLE/CRSreports/Agriculture/ag102.cfm

Wright, Gavin, 1986, Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the Civil War , New York: Basic Books.