## Mechanizing Cotton  Production in the American South: The Tractor,  1915-l 960

MOSES S. MUSOKE*

Rutgers University

The  economic  history  of  American  agriculture  over  the  past century or so is dominated by developments  involving the application  of machines to  farm  production. This  theme inevitably  focuses attention  on the production  of small grains and the Midwest where many of the more dramatic applications  of  machines  to  production originated  or  were  successful. Until  the 1920s  the production  of corn, cotton, and tobacco was relatively unaffected  by  mechanization.  In  contrast,  a revolution had occurred  in the methods of producing  small grains in the Midwest  in the 19th century, and  with  the  development of  the  mechanical corn  sheller  in  the  192Os, the full mechanization  of  corn  production  was assured.' And  with  this achievement  the  mechanization  of  the  principal  field  crops  of  northern agriculture  was complete.  On the other  hand,  cotton  and tobacco-two staples almost synonymous with  southern agriculture-remained largely unmechanized. Of these two,  cotton was, of course, the more important, at least  from  the standpoint of the proportion  of human and land resources devoted  to its production.  The  lag in the mechanization of  cotton relative to  wheat  is  evident from almost  every conventional measure of  this process. Even  the  most labor-intensive operations,  such as harvesting, which  had  been  mechanized in  the  small grains  in  the  185Os,  were  unchanged in  cotton  production  almost a century  later.*

The  relative technological  backwardness  of  the  cotton  industry  is of historical  interest  for  at least two  reasons. First,  cotton was the South's

- * I would like to  ,,thank  the members of  my  dissertation committee, Professors Peter Lindert, Morton Rothstein, and  Jeffrey  G.  Williamson for  their comments on  this paper as a dissertation chapter. Thanks are  also  due  to  two  anonymous referees  for  their  critiques. The errors are  my  responsibility.
- ' Danhof  (1%9); Parker and  Klein (1966);  Rogin (1931);  Rasmussen  (1%2); Street  (1957) pp.  96,  97;  Bray and  Watkins (1964.)
- *  An operational cotton picker did not become available commercially until the  mid194Os, and  had  little impact  on  the  industry until the  1950s. See  Fite  (1950);  Street (1957); Musoke (1976).

most important  agricultural  enterprise,  both in terms of  employment and total income.3 Secondly, relative  to wheat production  in the North,  cotton agriculture  was characterized by extremely  low  levels  of  income particularly among  the  sharecroppers,  laborers, and  small  farmers. Cotton growing  was in fact believed  by many to be at least partially  responsible for the  low  income  levels  in  the  region4  Hence  progress in  the  cotton sector  portended improvement in the  living levels of this region's inhabitants.

Street  was  writing in  the  1950s.  During the  three  decades following the  advent  of  the  tractor  the  cotton  industry  was  transformed into  a modem  agricultural  industry.  The  number  of  tractors  in the  South rose from  a mere 36,500 in  1920 to more than 271,000 in  1940, and during  the next  two  decades, they  increased by  a factor  of  more  than  5 to  more than  1.4 million.  Meanwhile  another  machine-the cotton picker-which was  critical to  the  mechanization  of  cotton  production, exhibited  impressive  rates  of  increase.  These  machines rose  from 1522 in  1948 to 15,550 in  1953, an  average  increase  of  better  than  2800 machines per year. This  average  increase rose to more than 3400 during  1952  to  1965.' Yields  too  improved markedly  in the  1940s  and 1950s.  Productivity shot up.  Between  1925-1929 and  1955-1959 man hours  per acre and per  bale of  cotton  declined  by  over  31 and 71%, respectively.  The  technological changes which  the industry  underwent  effected  changes so drastic  that

Given  the  importance  of  the  cotton  industry  in  the  economy  of  the South, it is not  surprising  that there has  been substantial interest in  'the cotton problem.' Explanations of the relative  backwardness of the cotton industry  and  southern  agriculture  in  general  are  legion,  encompassing historical,  economic,  technological,  and  social factors.'  Emphasis as to what  factors were  critical  varies  from  author  to author.  However, James Street,  in  his  important monograph  on  the  cotton  industry, seems to have  expressed the common view  when  he concluded that 'at  least since the  advent  of the tractor, the  stultifying effect  of  southern  social and economic institutions  has been a greater factor  than technical difficulties in  explaining  the  slow  rate  of  progress in  the  mechanization  of  cotton production and  the  lag  in  the  general  rationalization of  southern  agriculture  as we11.'6

- 3  In 1929 cotton accounted for  46%  of  cash  receipts, tobacco for  7.5%,  and corn for  a mere 1%.  See  Hoover and  Rutchford (1951) p. 103.
- ' This attitude is  reflected in  repeated calls  for  diversifying out  of  cotton and  into other presumably more  lucrative crops. See  DeCanio (1973).
- ' Woodward (1957), p. 179; Rasmussen (1%2), Davis  ef al. (1972), pp. 327,  384,  400; Tang  (1958),  p.  43;  Ransom and  Sutch (1972);  Street  (1957),  pp. 19-34; Fulmer (1950),  pp. 65,  69-72. For an  evaluation of  these  explanations, see Musoke (1976),  pp. 3-16. 6  Street (1957). p.  34.
- ' U.S. Census of  Agriculture, 1959,  Vol. 2, General Report (l%l), pp.  214-215, Street (1957), pp. 115,  133,  166;  Agricultural Statistics 1967, p. 524.

they  have  been  described  as a revolution. Sharecropping,  upon  which much  of  postbellum  cotton  production was based, was literally wiped out;  sharecroppers'  farms  declined  by more  than 90% between  1930  and 1959.* The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  account  for  the  pattern  of  the diffusion of  tractors  in  the cotton  industry,  and also to  shed some light on  the nature  of  mechanization  in  the American  South.'

I

The  choice  of  the  diffusion of  the  tractor  as a case study  rather  than other  innovations  is motivated  by several  reasons. First,  it was the most important  mechanical innovation  to be intruduced  in  the cotton  industry since Eli  Whitney's  gin.  It  was the tractor  that was to drag the southern farmer  out  of  the pre-Civil-War agricultural world  and into  the  'industrialized' agriculture of modern  industrial  America.' To  the  average southern  farmer, the  lumpiness  of  capital  tied  up  in  the  tractor represented tremendous  risks.  In  most  cases, tractor  ownership  entailed  reorganization  of  the  farm  and  changes in  the pattern  of  labor  utilization so as to  operate  the  tractor  economically.  These  changes involved the abandonment,  or  at  least  modification, of traditional production relationships,  so that  success  in adopting  the tractor  implied  ability  to adopt more  easily other  less demanding  innovations.

To  be sure,  it  was  the  cotton  picker  that  eliminated  the  'principal' bottleneck  in  cotton  production. The  cotton  picker  was also a far  more expensive machine  than  the  tractor (although cotton  strippers  were cheaper).  It  can therefore  be argued  that it  was the cotton  picker  which put  the cotton  producer's  abilities to the ultimate  test. But in fact  mechanizing  the  harvest,  i.e.,  using  the  cotton  picker,  did  not  involve such hard  decisions  as those  posed  by  the  tractor. This  is  because it  was essential for  the farmer  to own  and/or  control  the source of power  (such as a tractor  or a team of mules) on the farm  in order  to handle preharvest operations.  Indeed, until  the  late  1940s  even  mechanizing  the  harvest depended on owning  a tractor  since cotton  harvesters  were  designed to be powered  by tractors.  Prior  to the development  of  self-propelled  pickers, a tractor  was necessary for  mechanizing the harvest.  It  is true  that

- ' Stephens (1931), pp. 27-36; Street (1957); Statistics calculated from  Agricultural Statistics, 1971,  p.  437  and U.S.  Department Agriculture (1968), pp.  84-92.
- 9  The  tractorization of farms  is  considered the  best  index of  mechanization in  agriculture and  is  widely used.  See  Hayami  and  Ruttan  (1971)  p.  124; A  Study  ofthe Agricultural and Economic Problems of  the Cotton Belt, Hearings Before the Special Subcommittee on Cotton of  the  Committee on  Agriculture, House of  Representatives, 80th  Congress, First Session, July  7-8, 1947, p.  554. The South  is  defined  here  as Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North and  South  Carolina, Oklahoma, Tennessee and  Texas, the ten  leading cotton states.
- ' On  the  significance of  the  tractor for agricultural progress, see  Hayami and  Ruttan (1971), p.  146;  Davis et  al. (1972), p.  386;  Fulmer (1950), p.  71.

a  market for custom tractor services existed, mainly in heavy ploughing in which activity the superiority of  the tractor over work animals was first demonstrated. Nevertheless, both the buyer and  seller of  such  services viewed them as  supplementary and  were  often engaged in during the  off-season. Because of  the  variability and  unpredictable nature of  the weather, farmers found it necessary to  have  control over  a power source, and the inability to set  up a  reasonable and  predictable work schedule partly explains why farmers found cooperative ownership of tractors unsatisfactory. In fact, farmers were  so  concerned about ready access to a  source of  power that, despite the existence of  good resale market for workstock, at  least until the late 194Os, in  many cases  they held on to  their animals after acquiring a tractor. A  major reason  for  this 'wasteful' practice was to  minimize risk associated with machine breakdowns in a region that was  extremely short of mechanical skills and repair services.' On the other hand, mechanizing the harvest did not involve these difficulties because it was  not necessary for the farmer to own  a mechanical cotton harvester: since it was  used in only one operation over a  short period of  time custom arrangements were  less  complicated. The producer could avoid the risks inherent in the lumpiness of  capital tied up  in the cotton picker by  renting the services of  this machine. In fact, once satisfactory cotton pickers and strippers became available commercially in  the 1940s markets for  custom harvesting came  into  being. Consequently, even farmers with relatively small cotton acreage were able to enjoy some of  the economies of  scale as  far  as  harvesting costs were  concerned.'

Too, adopting the  tractor posed  other  peculiar problems for  the  farmer. The tractor was  both a  landand labor-saving innovation. It saved the land that was  used to grow  feed or pasture for work animals; it also reduced the number of  man hours for any  given mechanized operation. Initially, however, the operations in which the tractor could be used were  not the most labor-using. In cotton, chopping, hoeing, and harvesting were the most labor-intensive and until the late 1940s  these operations were not amenable to tractor power. Harvesting was  the principal bottleneck and harvest labor dictated the maximum cotton acreage a  farmer could raise unless he  had  access  to seasonal labor for harvesting. In the absence of hired labor for harvesting adopting the tractor that reduced the labor required in nonharvest operations simply exacerbated the harvesting bottleneck. One  way  out  of  this  dilemma was to reduce cotton acreage following the adoption of the tractor. This permitted a  more economical use  of  resident or family labor by  distributing (utilizing) it more evenly over the year  or  crop cycle. The acreage

- I' Butler and  Crawford (1948b), p.  3. I2 Lindsey (1961), pp.  7-9; Fulmer
- (1950), p.  69;  Starbird and  Vermeer (1961): Butler and  Crawford (1948a), p. 17.

TABLE 1 Shifts  in  the  Location of  Cotton Acreage, 1935 to  1959

|           | Acreage  (in  millions)   | Acreage  (in  millions)   | Acreage  (in  millions)   |
|-----------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|           | 1935-1939                 | 1955-1959                 | Change  (%)               |
| Southeast | 6.8                       | 2.5                       | -63                       |
| Delta     | 1.7                       | 4.1                       | -47                       |
| Southwest | 12.5                      | 6.8                       | -46                       |
| West      | 0.1                       | 1.3                       | +85                       |
| us.       | 27.8                      | 14.6                      | -41                       |

Source. Calculated from U.S.  Department of  Agriculture Starisrics on  Cotton and  Related Data, States  Bul. No.  417  Washington, DC  1968,  pp.  4,  5.

that  was taken  out  of  cotton  would  then  be used for  other  crops which were  more  amenable to  tractor  power.  In  some cases, where  either  the farm was  too  small  to  permit economical  multicrop combinations  or where  other  profitable  opportunities  in  and out  of  farming  were  opening up,  cotton  was  abandoned  altogether.13 In short,  adopting  the  tractor implied  a  chain of risky changes  not completely predictable by the farmer.

The  shifts  described  above  occurred  gradually.  They  represented,  on the  part  of  farmers, the aftermath  of  a large  number  of  microdecisions involving great  risks.  The  farmer  had  to  be  willing to  expand  the  size of  his farm  and/or  to  undertake  new  crop  combinations.  Ultimately,  the widespread  adoption  of  tractors  and the operation  of forces  that created new  opportunities in  farming interacted,  fed  on  each other,  and  manifested  themselves  in  major  structural  changes. These  included:  (1)  an increase  in  the  average  crop  acreage for  cotton  and  other  crops,  (2)  a reduction  in  total  acreage devoted  to cotton  and an increase in  that for other  crops,  (3) an absolute and relative  decline  in cotton  production  in the  Southeast  and  its  concomitant  increase  in  the  Southwest  and  the West-regions better  suited  to  mechanized production. Some of  these changes  are  portrayed in  Table 1.  Clearly, the  bigger  loser  was  the Southeast whose  share in total  U.S.  acreage fell  from  28% in  1935-1939 to 15% in  1955-1959.  What  the  Southeast lost  was  picked  up  by  the Southwest  and  the  West (essentially  California) whose combined  share rose from  47 to  55% over  the  same period,  1935-1939 to  1955-1959. In absolute terms, California's acreage increased by 85% while  that for  the Southeast decreased by  63%.

These  changes were  important  because they  occurred  simultaneously with  tractorizaton  and influenced  its pace. As cotton production  migrated

westward, its mechanization became easier. But mechanization undermined the competitiveness of  eastern states and  thereby accelerated the industry's westward migration.

I I

The changes described above became more apparent in the  post-World War I I era. In the mid-twenties they were  as yet almost imperceptible, and  the  tractor which had  dramatically invaded northern agriculture during World War I had  yet  to make its mark on  southern agriculture. The lag of cotton growers in adopting tractors prior to the late 1920s  is explicable largely by  the fact that up  to that time no  suitable machines were available to them. Growers could not use the earlier so-called standard tractors for cultivation of  row crops because of  the excessive wheel widths and  low axle clearance of  these machines. But the development of the general-purpose tractor in the mid-1920s made it technologically feasible for  the  predominantly cotton-producing South to  have access  to  tractor power. In contrast to  the standard tractor, the  generalpurpose tractor was  a  much lighter and more mobile machine whose flexibility and high speeds made it adaptable to a  variety of  uses  on  a farm. These characteristics greatly enhanced the attractiveness of  this innovation to cotton growers.  l4

The introduction of the general-purpose tractor coincided with the introduction of multirow equipment in the Cotton Belt. However, the shift to multirow equipment did not depend on the availability of the tractor. In fact, cotton farmers actually used both tractor and animal power in adopting multirow equipment about the mid-twenties. For example, in the Texas High Plains the introduction of  the general-purpose tractor coincided with that of  two-row horse-drawn lister-planters and cultivators, and  of  the  cotton sled  or  stripper in  harvesting cotton. Similar developments occurred in the San Angelo cotton producing area of Texas, and in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, although in the latter area progress was  slower.'

The 1920s  marked the beginning of  a  new  era  of  large-scale methods of production in southern agriculture. The tractor was  central to the transformation that became discernible in the late 1920s. Even before the  appearance of  the  revolutionary general-purpose tractor, cotton growers  had indicated their interest in tractor power by  experimenting with the  tractors that were  available during the  First World War. These earlier machines disappointed the hopes they raised because they were  'illadapted to  conditions or  of  poor construction and, in a few  cases,  were discarded after one year's use.' Such  horrendous experiences notwith-

where

PM  =  purchase price of  team of horses (mules) and accompanying equipment

PT  =  purchase price of  tractor  and accompanying equipment

- d  =  annual depreciation  rate
- w  =  variable  input price  (e.g., wage rate, feed, gasoline, etc.)

W,, W, =  level  of utilization  of variable  input (physical units/year)

- i= 1,2 .  .  .   , . n variable  nonland  inputs
- N  =  total  cotton acreage  on the farm.

standing,  a few  years after  the  general-purpose  tractor  was introduced certain  farmers in  the  Yazoo-Mississippi Delta  are  reported to  have adopted  it  readily.16 Such enthusiastic  risk  assumption  was,  however, atypical; the diffusion  of tractors in the Cotton  Belt was gradual. It  varied in  pace  and  timing  among  the  subregions or  sections, and even  within each area,  reflecting  the  wide  range  of  conditions  under  which  cotton is grown.  Thus  the  adoption  of  the tractor  in  one  section of  the  South could  not  blithely be extrapolated  to  the rest of  the region.

I have  estimated  the  costs of  alternative techniques  using  observed data. The  cost difference  per acre between  the two  techniques measures the  'extra' profit or  loss due  to  employing  one technique  as opposed to  another.  This  saving  S is defined  by  either  Eq.  (1)  if  the  farmer is confronted by long-run  considerations,  or by  Eq.  (2) if  he is faced  with short-run  constraints.

Any attempt to explain the observed  pattern of the diffusion  of tractors must at least demonstrate  its profitability, or lack thereof,  vis-bvis other sources of  power  that  were  available  to farmers.  With  respect to  profitability, this  procedure assumes  that  farmers  who  persisted in  using  a certain  technique  were  not on the average  sustaining losses. This  seems to be a reasonable assumption because rational  producers cannot persist in  employing  a technique  that  yields  negative  profits  beyond  the  short run  relevant for the  fixed  asset. Beyond  the  short  run  producers  are bound  to  abandon  a  method  of  production whose  average  total  cost exceeds  average  revenue. However, because  of  imperfect knowledge and differences  in behavior toward  risk,  it is possible for  two  processes to  coexist  in  the  same region  even  if  one  is  more  profitable than  the other  so long as for  each method  average revenue  exceeds average total cost.

$$S, = k[P,(&+r) -EWiWMi-P,(dT+r) -ZwiW,,], (1)$$

$$S, = k [CwiW,,-PT(dT+r) -ZWiWTJ, (2)$$

The prices of the inputs are  assumed to be  determined in competitive markets, i.e., they are independent of the production decision of the individual producer. In addition, it is  assumed that cotton yields per  acre are  invariant with choice of  technique.

The short run described by Eq. (2) is the period during which work animals are  a fixed cost, presumably because when  the  tractor appeared, farmers already owned their horses and/or mules with varying periods of  useful life left. The long run  described by  Eq.  (1)  pertains to  the  period when all costs are available. It is important to note that although the distinction between the short run  and  long run  is  theoretically legitimate, it is  irrelevant to the historical realities of  the 1930s  and 1940s  because a  resale market for workstock and  farm equipment existed during most of this period. Physical assets, such as  mules and horses, could be converted into liquid assets  fairly easily. Therefore, Eq. (2)  which assumes  work animals to  be  fixed, while  intuitively appealing, is misleading. Not until the 195Os,  when  the  dominance of  tractor power  was assured, did the resale market for  work animals and  associated equipment vanish. The result was  a  plummeting of  animal values. For most of  the period covered by  this study, the conditions relevant to  the  grower's choice of technique are  described by  Eq. (1).

We  should note also that S  is  a  partial measure of  the  benefits or  costs due  to  choice of  a particular production process. It measures cost  savings only for  the year  in which the  investment was made, and  all calculations are  based on  the relative prices for that year. Whenever S  is  positive it is  profitable to  adopt the  tractor process  unless  it  is  somehow perceived to be  riskier than the mule process. The total cost  savings generated by the asset  over its lifetime are  the  sum  of  the  annual savings. The present value of these full cost savings is given by the familiar discounting formula:

$$s* = $&* (3)$$

where  S,  computed from Eq. (1)  or  (2)  above, is  the  cost saving  accruing each  year, r  is  the appropriate rate of  interest, and  n  in  this case  is  equal to 15,  the expected life of  the tractor (15  years).'

Cost saving estimates, S,  are  based on  the production conditions and costs for three selected subregions, namely, the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, the  South Carolina Piedmont, and  the  Texas High Plains. Selection of these areas was  dictated mainly by data considerations. Relatively

' Brodell and  Kendall (1950).  The  useful  life  of a  mule  in  Mississippi is 8 years;  in  South Carolina it is 15  years. See  Long (1931); Russell (1931). The South Carolina estimates though used  seem  rather too high and  tend to  generate cost  estimates favorable to  the mule  process. For  both Mississippi and  Texas  the  estimate used  for  workstock is  8  years of  useful life.

reliable  data on  production  and cost conditions  in  these areas are available in  many  studies done  by  state agricultural  experiment  stations and by  U.S.  Department of  Agriculture researchers.  These  subregions  are also representative of  conditions  in  the  major  cotton-growing areas of the south, namely, the Southeast, the Mississippi Delta, and the Southern Plains.

Two  sizes of  cotton  acreages were  selected; 15 and  30 cotton  acres for the  Yazoo-Mississippi Delta  and  South Carolina  Piedmont,  and  30 cotton acres for  the Texas High  Plains. Fifteen  cotton acres were typical of  small farm  operations  in  the Delta:  with  minimal  or  no hired  labor  a family  could  work 15 acres of  cotton  and  15 acres of  other  crops.  On 30 acres of  cotton  in  the Delta  some hired  labor  was necessary, and a family that  produced  this  much  cotton  usually  had  some 60  acres in cropland  of  which  about  one-half  was in  cotton.  In  the  South Carolina Piedmont  15 and 30 acres of cotton  represented medium and large cotton farms.  These  two  cotton  acreages were  typical  of  two-mule  and  fourmule  units,  and  therefore provide a good  basis for  comparison  with  a tractor.'*  All  costs have  been charged to cotton because it was the most important,  indeed the cash crop.  A  1940 Census study'  of  cotton  farms revealed  cotton  to  account for  49% of  cash income on the average  farm in  Texas,  55% in  South  Carolina,  and 67% in  Mississippi. Additionally, charging  all  costs to  cotton  enables us to  make the least favorable case

Geographically,  the  South Carolina  Piedmont  is characterized by  undulating  hilly  uplands that presented tremendous problems for  large-scale mechanization.  On the other  hand, the Mississippi Delta  is for  the most part  flat,  with  rich  soils and abundant moisture.  Weed control  was a real problem,  and the  luxuriant  cotton  plant  that grew  here presented  a formidable  challenge  for mechanizing the  harvest.  In  contrast,  the  Texas High  Plains  is  relatively flat, with  moderate  rainfall, and  of  the  three areas it  offered the best prospects for  large-scale mechanization. Also, in  contrast  to  other  parts  of  the  South,  this  region  had  a different developmental path.  Specifically,  sharecropping  was  never  an  important part  of  the economy of  West Texas; farms were larger  and migrant labor was more readily  available.  All  these factors  made for  an  environment more  conducive to  the  diffusion of  tractors  in  Texas  than  that  in  the states to  the  east.

- '*  Gaines and  Crowe (1950) p.  6;  Butler and  Crawford (1948a);  Butler (1950),  p.  4; Magee er al.  (1944). In  the  Texas High  Plains 6 mules  and/or horses  per  farm  were used,  probably because  of  the shorter growing season.  The  tractor on  which the  estimates are  baaed  is a  medium tractor (20-29 hp at  the draw bar) which had  enough power to  handle field operations.
- I9 U.S. Department of  Commerce Bureau of  the  Census, 16th  Census  ofthe U.S.: 1940, Agriculture; Special Cotton Report, Washington, D.C. 1943,  pp. 2-15. Value of  cotton and  total traded products obtained by  multiplying cotton output with prices from U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1%8).

of  how  attractive tractors might have  appeared to the cotton farmer. In other words, the cost savings are  biased downward since cotton production was  the  least amenable to tractor power. The cost  savings presented must be  viewed as  the lower bound of  the benefits or  costs that cotton growers considering adopting tractors could expect.

20 The operations in which the tractor was  used in cotton production varied from area  to  area. In the  Texas High Plains, they included cutting stalks  of  previous years' crop, knifing, planting, and  cultivating (3  times). In South Carolina they  involved cutting stalks, disking, harrowing, bedding, fertilizing, planting, and cultivating (3-5 times). In Mississippi the list is even longer, including cultivating (7-8 times), and poisoning.*' For purposes of  comparing the tractor and  workstock, only mechanized operations were  included. It was  assumed that for the unmechanized operations, such  as chopping, weeding, and  harvesting, costs  were  invariant with the source of power on the farm. The unmechanized operations eventually became amenable to tractor power, thereby increasing its appeal. For  example, in  the  late 1940s flame  cultivators and  cotton pickers could be  operated with tractors. However, the fraction of  tractors used in these operations was  quite small so  that the opportunity to so  use tractors was  not a  major influence on  the decision of most farmers to adopt tractors. However, the mechanization of  the harvest, especially with the development of  the market for custom services, did facilitate tractorization by  breaking a  major labor bottleneck.

A  word about the procedure for  calculating costs. The  costs  on  which the  cost savings are  based  were  obtained by  pricing the  estimated quantities of productive services used per year. For example, the annual charges associated with the operation of tractor would include annual interest based on  purchase price, straight-line depreciation based  on ISyear  life, repairs and  maintenance, oil and  gasoline, based  on  annual use determined on  the basis of the size  of  the farm, wages  for the tractordriver, etc. A  similar procedure was followed for  the mule process. For instance we priced, among other things, veterinary services, service labor for animals, and  feed including pasture. That is, every economic input was  priced at  its opportunity cost or  its equivalent. Of  necessity, most of  the prices used  are  state  averages and  in a  couple of  instances, when even these  were  not  avaiiable, national averages were  used. While such data may not accurately reflect the circumstances facing every farmer, I believe they adequately depict the general trends.

One  cost  item, namely, the rate  of  interest, has  been  problematic. The relevant interest rate to  use  when one  is  confronted with a  wide spread of  interest rates is a  difficult problem. Most writers on  agriculture use

a  5% interest  rate  for farm  assets. It  is not  clear  to  the  present  writer whether  this rate  reflects the  most prevalent  price  of  financial  capital  or not.  It seems that  interest  charged  on  long-term  farm  assets  fluctuated very  little  from  5% for  a relatively long period  of time. This is in contrast to  interest  on  short-term  loans which  varied  widely.2'

Although  a 5% rate of  interest  was used in  computing  costs, it  seems unlikely  that most farmers  borrowed at this rate.  Recognizing that most farmers  did not obtain  credit  on 'most  favored' terms, different  interest rates were  used to  determine  the sensitivity  of  the results to  the rate of interest used. However, the cost savings are not very  sensitive to interest rates over  a wide  range.  For  example, doubling  the  rate from  5 to  10% for  small farmers-those with  15  acres  or less  in cotton-does not change the  results  materially, that  is,  reverse  profits  to  losses. The  reason for this is that interest  on durable  inputs, whether  figured  at 5 or  lo%,  never amounts to  more than a small fraction  of total  costs-2 to 7%. Therefore with  a  reasonable  spread of  rates,  the  effect  of  interest  rates faced  by different farmers  was more  psychological  than  economic.  Later  the relationship  between  the different charges faced  by  different farmers  and the diffusion of  tractors  is discussed.

A  word  about  the  benchmarks  for  the weights  for  inputs  and performance rates used in estimating costs is in order.  It  has not been possible to  determine  the  level  of  the  utilization of  inputs  into  each productive process  for each  year  covered by  the  cost  estimates. Hence  a  fixed weight  from  a base year or  period  has been applied to  successive years after ascertaining  that  no  major  changes in  practices  that  might  have invalidated such  weights  occurred.  The  base  year  or  years  vary with each  region. For the  Yazoo-Mississippi Delta  the  weights  are  from 1929-1930  and  1947; for  the  South  Carolina Piedmont,  they  are  from 1929 and  1947; and  for the  Texas  High  Plains, they  are  from 1931 to 1935. A comparison  of  performance  rates for  the  1930s  and 1940s  reveals very little variation over time.  Improvements to  the  tractor over  this period  tended  to  affect  not  so much  the  time  required  to  complete  a given task,  but  rather the  quality  of the  work, the  reliability of the machine  (less prone  to  breaking  down),  and  ultimately  the  comfort  of the  operator.22

I  have  presented  in  the  Appendix  total  fixed  and  total  variable costs for selected years  for  Mississippi,  South  Carolina,  and Texas  in  order to  give  the  reader  some idea  of  how  costs changed over  time.  The  cost savings based on  cost data for  all  years (only  some of  which  are in  the Appendix due  to  space constraints)  are  presented  in  Tables  2  and  3.

- *'  American Society of  Agricultural Engineers (1959), p. 106;  U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1957), pp.  22-25; Fenier (1940);  Johnson et  al. (1935),  pp.  25-27; Street  (1957), p.  60. '*  Long (1931); Gaines  and  Crowe (1950); Russell (1931); Magee et  al. (1944).

TABLE 2

Total Cost  Savings  per  Acre, S,,  Based on 15 Acres of  Cotton in Mississippi and  South Carolina, 1930-1959 (dollars)

|   Year | Mississippi   | South  Carolina   |
|--------|---------------|-------------------|
|   1930 | -  7.72       | -2.58             |
|   1933 | -  8.39       | -2.37             |
|   1935 | -  7.37       | -  0.49           |
|   1936 | -4.86         | -  1.47           |
|   1938 | -9.17         | -3.57             |
|   1940 | -  7.38       | -  1.13           |
|   1941 | -6.12         | -0.04             |
|   1943 | 1.10          | 5.86              |
|   1945 | 2.26          | 9.58              |
|   1947 | 3.69          | 13.45             |
|   1949 | 3.15          | 4.91              |
|   1951 | 3.60          | 7.23              |
|   1953 | 5.25          | 6.41              |
|   1955 | 1.27          | 2.15              |
|   1957 | -1.66         | 0.09              |
|   1959 | -  1.94       | -2.25             |

Source. See  the  text and  Appendix.

TABLE 3

Total Cost  Savings  per Acre, S,,  Based on  30 Acres of  Cotton in Mississippi, South Carolina, and  Texas, 1930-1959 (dollars)

| Year       | Mississippi   | South  Carolina   | Texas        |
|------------|---------------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1930       | -  2.52       | 5.06              | 7.75         |
| 1933       | -3.98         | 1.86              | 3.97         |
| 1935       | -  2.53       | 4.14              | 6.53         |
| 1936       | 0.28          | 6.61              | 6.41         |
| 1938       | -3.70         | 1.65              | 4.85         |
| 1940       | -2.27         | 3.97              | 5.09         |
| 1941  1943 | -1.00         | 5.26              | 5.73         |
|            | 6.33          | 11.86             | 11.40        |
| 1945       | 7.79          | 15.49             | 12.59        |
| 1947       | 10.16         | 20.79             | 16.43        |
| 1949       | 11.39         | 14.04             | 12.11        |
| 1951  1953 | 12.45  14.09  | 17.16  16.25      | 13.88  13.49 |
| 1955       | 10.85         |                   | 13.61        |
| 1957       | 8.91          | 12.79  11.88      | 10.76        |
| 1959       | 9.16          | 9.83              | 11.40        |

Source. See  the  text and  Appendix.

These are cost savings per acre in the mechanized nonharvest  operations based on  15 and 30 acres of  cotton.  These estimates indicate  that it  was not profitable  for  farms  with  only  15 acres or  less  in  cotton to  adopt the tractor in  Mississippi  and  South  Carolina  during  the period  1930-1941. However, from 1943 on  the  tractor  established  itself  as the  cheapest source of  power.  For  farms with  30 acres of  cotton, cost savings indicate that  it  was  profitable to  mechanize,  i.e.,  adopt  the  tractor, in  South Carolina and  Texas  High  Plains  even  in  the  1930s. In  the  Mississippi Delta  it  became  economic  to  mechanize for a  farm  with  30  acres  of cotton  only  after  U.S.  entry  into  World  War  II. In  fact,  my  estimates indicate  that by  1945  the equal-cost, or  to use Paul David's  terminology the  'threshold,' acreage  for Mississippi  had  declined  to  12 acres  as compared  to  the  1930s when  the  tractor  could  not  compete with  work animals,  even  on  30-acre cotton  farms.

A look at factor  price trends during the two decades  after  1940  indicates clearly  that the tractor  should have  been preferred  over  workstock.  The costs of  inputs that were  important  in the mule process rose substantially relative to those for  the tractor.  Using  1940  as  the base,  the tractor  price index  rose by 80 points between  1940  and 1949, and by another 64 points by  1959; the  fuel  price  index  rose by  only  22 points  between  1940 and 1949, and by  another  73 points during  the  1950s.  The  feed index,  on the other  hand,  more  than  doubled  during  the  194Os, ut  peaked in  1951 at b 236 and  stabilized during  the  1950s at about  100 points  above  the  1940 level.  The  farm  wage index outdistanced all the others. During  the  1940s it  rose by  a whopping  240 points,  but  still  managed to climb  more  than 100 points  in  the  1950s to  reach  447  in  1959. The  explanation  for  the behavior of  wage  rates  during  the  1940s  and  1950s  is,  in  some sense, fairly  simple. Following  U.S. entry into World War II  wages skyrocketed, partly  in response to the war-induced  demand for  farm  commodities, and partly  because of  the drain  of  manpower  into the armed forces  and other war-related  activities.  Prices for  farm  machinery  rose but  not as rapidly as wage rates did.  These trends  continued  after  the war  as higher  wages and increasing opportunities  in the nonfarm  sectors, and for  blacks a less hostile political  climate outside the South, accelerated migration  to urban centers  and  outside  of  agriculture.  Not  until  the  late  1950s  did  wages stabilize. By this time impetus had been given  to a mechanization movement whose momentum could not be stopped except by drastic reversals in factor  price  ratios.  But except for  work  animals which  were becoming technologically  obsolete,  such reversals  were  nowhere  in  sight.23

23  Street (1957), p. 177; Fulmer (1950), p. 472; Musoke (1976), p. 99. Russell (1931), p. 8; Butler (1950), p. 9; Smith and Jones (1948), p. 5; U.S. Census of Agriculture, 1940, Vol. ZZ  (1942), Pts. 4, 5, Table 11.

## III

Table  4  and  Chart 1 give some idea  of  the  increase  in  tractors  on southern  farms  and  their  relationship  to  the  profitability of  the  tractor vis-a-vis work  animals.  The  data pertain  to  tractors  that  could  be used in  field operations,  that  is,  garden  tractors  are  excluded.  The  strong correlation  between  average  cost savings and the absolute (and relative) increase in  tractors  on  farms  is  unmistakable.  But  the  relationship  between  cost savings  attributable  to  the  tractor  process and  the  increase in  tractors  which  Table  4 focuses on  is only  part  of  the story.  We need to know,  for  example,  the relationship  between farm  mechanization and cotton  mechanization,  and  also  we  need  to  know  what  kind  of  farms spearheaded the  diffusion of  tractors.

The  data in  Table  4 are  more  intriguing  because of  what  they  reveal about  the  diffusion of  tractors  during the  1930s. Tractors  increased  in all three states,  indeed throughout  the South, and even  Mississippi which

TABLE 4 Cost  Savings,  S,,  Number of  Tractors and Percentage Change  for  Mississippi, South Carolina, and  Texas, 1930-1959 (dollars)

| Year            | S,    | No.  Tracto&amp;   | Change  (%)   |
|-----------------|-------|----------------|---------------|
| Mississippi     |       |                |               |
| 1930            |       | 5,542          | -             |
| 1940            | G2.45 | 10,577         | 90.9          |
| 1945            | 4.37  | 20,925         | 97.8          |
| 1950            | 10.78 | 50,490         | 141.3         |
| 1954            | 13.27 | 79,575         | 57.6          |
| 1959            | 9.64  | 84,425         | 6.1           |
| South  Carolina |       |                |               |
| 1930            | -     | 3,462          | -             |
| 1940            | 3.88  | 4,791          | 38.4          |
| 1945            | 10.87 | 12,551         | 162.0         |
| 1950            | 17.42 | 29,124         | 132.0         |
| 1954            | 16.71 | 44,631         | 53.2          |
| 1959            | 11.50 | 48,637         | 9.0           |
| Texas           |       |                |               |
| 1930-           | -     | 37,348         | -             |
| 1940            | 5.77  | 98,923         | 164.9         |
| 1945            | 9.91  | 163,591        | 65.4          |
| 1950            | 14.27 | 226,501        | 38.5          |
| 1954            | 13.69 | 268,613        | 18.6          |
| 1959            | 11.92 | 268,233        | -0.1          |

Source. Calculated Born Table 2,  and  U.S.  Census  of  Agriculture, 1959,  Vol.  II  General Report (Washington. D.C. l%l), pp. 214,  215.

CHART I. Left: Index numbers of tractors in the South and the United States, 1929-1959. Right: Percentage of tractorized farms,  the  South  and United States,  1925-1959. Source. Calculated from  U.S. Bureau of  the Census, U.S.  Census  of Agriculture, 1959, Vol.  2,  General Report (Washington, D.C., l%l), pp.  214-215.

<!-- image -->

had negative  cost savings experienced  a hefty  90% increase during  this decade. This  is remarkable  even  if  allowance  is made for  the fact  that the  South  started at a low  base in  1930 relative  to  the non-South.  Considering the depressed atmosphere of  this era and the fact  that labor  was superabundant,  so much  that  knowledgeable  observers  predicted  stagnation  of  mechanization,  the pace of  farm  tractorization  is paradoxical. Richard  Day  (1967), in  his  study of  technical  change in  the  Mississippi Delta,  found that  during  the  1930s this  region  entered  what  he  called Stage III of  mechanization.  This  stage involved adoption  of  the tractor and  other  farm  machines, and  the  mechanization  of  all  preharvest  operations  except  weeding  in  cotton.  Obviously  the  trend  in  farm  tractorization  was  not  halted  by  the  Depression.  The  paradox  of  increasing capital  substitution  and  the  displacement  of  labor  when  the  latter  was superabundant is explicable  by the fact that some of the factors  affecting the  cost and revenue  curves  faced by  some farmers  are not captured  in our  estimates. For  instance, federal  farm  programs  involving price  supports,  acreage reductions, benefit payments and subsidized  credit favored mechanization.  Consequently  some landlords  bought  tractors  and  dispensed  with  sharecroppers  or  revised  share contracts  to  their  benefit. It is  not  surprising  therefore that  during  the  1930s  sharecropper  farms in  the  South  declined  by  over 33%, and  over  91% between  1930 and 1960.'

*' Butler and  Crawford (1948), p.  17; Gaines and  Crowe (1950),  pp.  9,  10;  Fulmer (1950), p.  40;  Broadus Mitchell (1947),  p.  201;  Musoke (1976),  pp. 202-206; USDA, Agricultural Statistics, 1971,  p.  437.

However, the  relatively high increase of  tractors and  the displacement of sharecroppers can  give a  misleading impression about the extent of cotton mechanization. Cotton was one  of  the  least mechanized crops so that farm tractorization and  cotton mechanization were  not  synonymous. This cautionary observation should not be  interpreted to  mean that tractors were  unimportant in cotton production: they were  important. Two pieces of evidence confirm this claim. First, if tractors were  used on crops  other than cotton, we would expect the diffusion of  tractors to  lag in the counties that devoted more of  their crop acreage to cotton than was the  case for  the  less  cotton-intensive counties. Leading cotton counties  were  selected for  Texas, Mississippi, and  South Carolina.' Contrary to the hypothesis stated above, these counties led in adopting tractors during 1945-1959, the period for which data  are  available at  the county level. This finding should not be  very  surprising since  the leading cotton counties also tended to  be  the  richest agricultural areas, and  specialized in the most cash-generating crop-cotton. They therefore were more capable of  financing innovations, such  as  the tractor.

The other evidence about the relationship between cotton and  farm tractorization relates to  the utilization of  tractors in cotton. Brodell and Ewing (1948)  made a  study of  the use  of  power on  farms during the late 1930s  and 1940s. Their findings indicate that tractors were  being used in all preharvest operations in  cotton production. More importantly, their data show  that the rate of  tractor utilization was  high relative to  tractor ownership. Significantly, tractors were  being used  even  on  sharecropped acreage and new  sharing arrangements were  evolving during the 1930s and 1940~.~~

This widespread use  of  tractors notwithstanding, it is clear that the diffusion of  tractors was spearheaded by  large  farms and  that small farms lagged behind. There are  several pieces of  evidence supporting this observation, besides the numerous claims in the literature that small farms were  impeding mechanization. First, as  late as  1954  over 47% of all tractors were  on  farms that had  two  or  more tractors. Such  farms were not typical small farms and  the  fact that they constituted less  than 9% of  all farms underscores the concentration of  tractors on  large farms.27

2J In fact, the leading cotton-producing counties in Mississippi, South Carolina, and Texas also  led  in the  tractorization of  farms. See  U.S.  Census  of Agriculture 1959, Vol. I, Counties, Pts.  27,  33,  and  37  (1961)  Table 6;  and  U.S.  Census  of Agriculture, 1950,  Vol. I, Counties, Pts.  27,  33,  and  37  (1952),  Table 6;  Musoke (1976),  pp. 132-135. The  selected counties for  Mississippi are  Bolivar, Coahoma, Holmes, Humphrey, Issoquena, Leflore, Quintman, Sharkey, Sunflower, Tallahatchie, Tunica, Washington, and  Yazoo; for  South Carolina; Anderson, Lexington, Marlboro, Saluda, Spartauburgs, Sumter, and  York; for Texas: Crosby, Floyd, Hockley, Lubbock, and  Swiser. x U.S. Census of Agriculture, 1940,  Vol. II, Pts.  4-5 Table 11;  Butler and  Crawford

- (1948b). ' Statistics calculated from U.S.  Census  of Agriculture, 1959,  Vol. 2,  (l%l), pp.  34,
- 217.

A  study  of  cotton  farms  done  by  the  Census Bureau  for  the  National Cotton  Council (1947)  is  illuminating with respect  to  the  relationship between  farm  size and  tractor  ownership.  This  unusually  detailed  study classified  cotton  producing  farms  by  cotton  acreage as of  1944. It  also presented  data  on,  among  other  things,  tractors  on  the  various  farms. Some of  these  data  are  summarized in  Table  5 for  Mississippi,  Texas, and South  Carolina.  For  brevity, I  have  dichotomized cotton  farms  into those  harvesting less than  30 acres of  cotton  and  those  harvesting  30 acres or  more.  I  shall  refer to  the  latter  as 'large' and  the former as 'small' farms.  As  can be  seen, farms  with  30 acres of  cotton  or  more were  a very small proportion in  Mississippi  (2.0%) and  South  Carolina (2.5%). But  as is readily  ascertainable from  Table  5, a farm  in this group in  Mississippi  was  13 times as likely  to  own  a tractor  as its counterpart that  harvested  less than  30 acres; in  South  Carolina,  the  ratio  was 9. The  situation  was  less lopsided  in  Texas  where  large  farms  made  up approximately  41% of  all  cotton farms,  and were  only  about  three times as likely  to  own  a tractor as their  small counterparts.

The  timing  problem  presented by the data in Table  5 can be overcome by using data that permit  an analysis of  the diffusion  of tractors overtime and  across states.  Such data  are  presented  in  Table  6.  Unfortunately these data are not  quite  comparable  to those in Table  5. In  Table  6 the ratio  of  'undersized' farms,  UFR,  consists of farms harvesting  less than 30 acres of  cropland  (cotton  and others)  to all farms  harvesting  one acre of  cropland  or  more.  The  'one acre harvested' minimum  is used as a rough  criterion  for a farm  and is supposed to  exclude gardens. Ideally, acreage  harvested  should  be  cotton acreage  in  order  to  be  consistent

A couple  of  additional  observations  can be made about the data in the Special Cotton  Report  and in Table  5. The  first  is that  there were  a few smaller firms  that  took  advantage of  tractors.  The  evidence  in the report indicates  that  even  firms  that  harvested  as little  as 5 acres of  cotton  in 1944 did  have  tractors.  The  second point  is that there  were  many large farms  that  did  not  own  tractors  at  this  date,  1944. Texas  had  the best record  with  just  over 80% of  the  large  farms  reporting tractors;  South Carolina  had the worst  with  only 43%. Of  the large farms in Mississippi, roughly  48% had tractors  by  1944.  Overall,  by the mid-forties,  more than half  the  large  farms-farms that  presumably  could  have  improved  their net  income  by  using  tractors  instead  of  work animalMid not  have tractors.  One explanation  for  this 'backwardness' is that tractorization had just  started  in  the  South  when  the  Great  Depression  hit,  and  had not  quite  got  back on  track  even  in  the  more favorable environment of World  War  II because war  needs took  precedence.. There  was a lot  of pent  up  demand for  tractors  and other  farm  machinery.  Unfortunately, data  based on  1944 do  not  allow  us to  say much  about  the  record  of these farms  vis-a-vis mechanization under  less distorted  conditions.

TABLE 6 Percentage of  Farms  Harvesting Less  than  30 Acres', UFR, Tractorized Farms  Ratio, TFR, and  Adjusted Tractorized Farms  Ratio, ATFR, for Selected States  and

Cotton South, 1930-1959

| Year            | UFR   | TFR   | ATFR   |
|-----------------|-------|-------|--------|
| Mississippi     |       |       |        |
| 1930            |       | 0.02  | -      |
| 1940            | -     | 0.03  | -      |
| 1945            | 79%   | 0.06  | 0.28   |
| 1950            | 79    | 0.14  | 0.66   |
| 1954            | 80    | 0.27  | 1.30   |
| 1959            | 76    | 0.43  | 1.78   |
| South  Carolina |       |       |        |
| 1930            | -     | 0.02  | -      |
| 1940            |       | 0.03  | -      |
| 1945            | 6%    | 0.07  | 0.23   |
| 1950            | 69    | 0.17  | 0.57   |
| 1954            | 73    | 0.30  | 1.12   |
| 1959            | 69    | 0.47  | 1.49   |
| Texas           |       |       |        |
| 1930            | -     | 0.06  | -      |
| 1940            | -     | 0.21  | -      |
| 1945            | 3%    | 0.42  | 0.69   |
| 1950            | 36    | 0.61  | 0.95   |
| 1954            | 34    | 0.82  | 1.25   |
| 1959            | 32    | 0.98  | 1.44   |
| Cotton  South   |       |       |        |
| 1930            | -     | 0.04  | -      |
| 1940            | -     | 0.08  | -      |
| 1945            | 63%   | 0.15  | 0.37   |
| 1950            | 63    | 0.30  | 0.78   |
| 1954            | 62    | 0.47  | 1.30   |
| 1959            | 59    | 0.65  | 1.65   |

Source. Calculated from U.S. Census  of Agriculture, 1959. Vol. II, General Report (Washington, D.C., l%l), p.  215; U.S.  Census  of Agriculture, 1964,  Statistics for State and Counties (Washington, D.C., 1%5), Table 5,  p. 22.

with  the cost savings which  are based on cotton  acreage. Unfortunately, cotton  acreage is not  available  by  farm  size  except for 1944 (see Table 5). However, assuming that on the average half  the acreage was planted to  cotton,  UFR  represented  farms  that  harvested  less than  15 acres of cotton.'  The  tractorized farms ratio,  TFR,  consists  of farms with  tractors over  farms  harvesting  one acre of  cropland  or  more.  The  adjusted tractorized  farms  ratio,  ATFR, is obtained  by  dividing  farms  with  tractors

by  farms that harvested 30  or  more acres  of  cropland (cotton and  other crops). A  farm with this much crop  acreage was large enough to  permit technical efficiency in the operation of a  tractor. If all farms with 30 acres  or  more adopted tractors, the ATFR ratio would be  unity; if only some of  them did, the ratio would be  less  than one. But if these  farms, as well as some  farms with  less  than 30 acres  adopted tractors, the  ATFR could exceed unity. This, in fact, happened in the midand  late 1950s as  can  readily be  ascertained from Table 6.

The data in Table 6  reveal a  major reason why  tractor ownership was not widespread in the South prior to the 1950s  and 1960s;  there were too many farms too small to  utilize available tractors efficiently, except on  a custom rental basis. The  significance of  initial farm size  is  highlighted by  the  inverse relationship across  states  and  over  time between  the  UFR and  the  ATFR ratios shown  in  Table 6.  Thus Texas with  the  lowest UFR ratio had  the  highest ATFR ratio from the  beginning, and  she  maintained her  position throughout the  period. In this state, the size  distribution of farms on the eve of the general-purpose tractor required the least adjustment to accommodate this machine as  compared to the states in the Southeast for  which history and  geography had  created a preponderance of small farms.

It should be  noted though that not  all small farming units were  inimical to tractorization. There were  small owner or part-owner farms as  well as  small cash tenant and sharecropper farms. On sharecropper farms, the  decision respecting the  quantity and  type of  inputs, including capital, was  made primarily by  the planter or  the landlord. If his  interests were better served by  tractorization, the  planter could, and  in  many instances did, combine sharecropper units and  'demoted' their previous operators to wage  labor or set  them adrift to fend  for themselves elsewhere. Or, as  peak labor demands necessitated prior to the full mechanization of chopping and harvesting cotton in the 195Os, the  landlord could use  the tractor on  the tenants' tracts and  adjust their share  downward to reflect the value of tractor services. In these circumstances, sharecropping would not impede tractorization or mechanization.29 Indeed, since it promotes individualism and thereby inhibits collective action, it is a lesser obstacle to  change than  wage  labor which might be  more amenable to collective resistance if extensive labor disemployment is threatened. It is,  therefore, not surprising that in the  Mississippi Delta region tractors were  readily adopted on  plantations that had  been  predominantly sharecropped. This was  true in other parts of  the South as  well. A  study of

r,  A familiar argument in  the  literature is  that sharecropping fostered mutual  attachment between the planter and the sharecropper resulting in paternalism that detracted from economic rationality. Day's (1967) study  tended to  show that paternalism was  no  major obstacle to  change. Mandle (1978)  has disputed the  existence or  significance of paternalism in 20th~century southern agriculture.

tractors  in South Carolina  in the 194Os,  or  example, found  that cropperf operated  farms  were  among the first  to adopt tractors.' It  was on owner or part-owner  farms  that initial  smallness  was consequential with  respect to tractorization.  Many  farmers  had farms  too small to justify  ownership and operation  of a tractor  without  investing  in additional  land. And  many probably  found  this extra investment  beyond  their  means. Hence Texas, where  the  initial size distribution of  farms  more  closely  approximated the  requirements  of  the  tractor,  enjoyed  a definite  advantage  over her eastern  neighbors.' This  advantage  is reflected  in  the  behavior of  her TFR  ratio  relative  to those for  South Carolina  and Mississippi (see  Table 6).

The  importance  of  the  initial  farm  size distribution notwithstanding, changes in  factor  prices  and  other  variables  appear  to  have  been more important  for  the  diffusion of  tractors  than  changes in  farm  size. This is indicated  by the  behavior of  the  UFR  and TFR  ratios  over  time;  the increase in  the  latter  far  outweights  the decrease in the former.  That  is, in the late  1940s  and  1950s  the percentage of tractorized  farms  rises less because  of  a  decreasing  denominator because of  farm consolidation, decreasing  the  number  of  farms,  but  largely  because more  farms,  including  small farms,  found  it  profitable  to  switch to  tractor  power.  Still until  the  1950s  the  majority  of  farmers  did  not  switch.  Apparently  even farmers  who  seemed to  have  had enough  acreage to justify tractors,  at least on  grounds  of  technical  efficiency,  did  not  own  tractors  otherwise the ATFR  would  have  been approximately  unity  or greater. It is tempting to  conclude  that  farmers  who  had  enough  acreage to  support  a tractor but  continued  to  rely  on  work  animals did  so because of  timidity,  conservatism,  ignorance,  or  whatever might account for  economic irrationality.  Such an opinion,  if  based solely on an analysis of  the cost savings presented  here,  is  unwarranted for reasons that  will  become  apparent momentarily.

The  cost savings  I  have  presented  are  predicated  on  the  assumption that  all  farmers,  irrespective of  production  levels,  faced the  same input prices for  similar  commodities  and  services. This  assumption is unrealistic. Small and medium farms tended to use the less expensive  (in terms of  out-of-pocket expenses) family  labor  (women  and  children)  whereas large  farms  and  plantations  had  to  rely  more  on  hired  labor.  There  is also plenty of evidence  indicating that the small producers obtained credit at  substantially  higher  rates  than  large  growers.32 The  higher  cost  of credit  must  have  lessened these  farmers' enthusiasm for innovations,

- 3o  Butler and  Crawford (1948), p.  3.
- ' See  U.S.  Census  of  Agriculture, 1959, Vat. 1,  Counties (l%l), Table 6.  As  late as 1950 about 25%  of  farms  owned only one  work animal. See  U.S.  Census  of Agriculture, 1950,  Vol. 2,  General Report (1952), p.  227.
- '*  Gaines and  Crowe (1950)  pp. 7,  8;  Musoke (1976), pp. W-202.

such  as  the  tractor, that necessitated reliance on  external funds. Moreover, such  farmers might have  been  shut  out  of  credit markets altogether as  unacceptable risks. In any  case,  interest rates charged varied widely depending on  the  lender's perception of  the risk represented by  a  given borrower. I estimated cost savings using interest rates ranging from 5 to 10%  for the 1930s  and 1940s. Within this spread of interest rates, variation in the rate does  not affect the direction (i.e., sign) of  the cost savings. The reason for this is that interest charges are  a  small fraction of  total costs, ranging from 2  to  7% of  the total. However, varying the wage  rate presents a  different picture. When a  low wage  rate  (assumed to be  half the hired rate) is used  for small farms, the tractor ceases  to be  a profitable proposition even  in  the  1940s.  The quantitative importance of  the labor input in the mule process makes cost  savings quite sensitive to variations in the wage  rate. Small farmers who  relied mostly on  lowpriced family labor were  probably better off with the mule rather than the tractor process. Too, the tractor might have been too risky an  investment for  them. For  instance, repair services posed greater problems for small farmers than for  their better-endowed counterparts who  might even have a  repairman or two  as  employees on  the  farm. Mention was made earlier of  the  fact  that some  farmers hang  on  to  their work animals after they acquired tractors. Clearly, small farmers could not afford the burden of such 'reserve power' and could rationally shun the tractor as  too costly. These conditions, we  should note, changed rapidly in the late 1940s  and 1950s  as  financial institutions in rural areas improved, better transportation and communications increased mobility, and the development of  small and  minitractors that were  reliable put within the reach of  even small farmers 20th~century agricultural technology.

Agricultural historians date to the 1940s the  second Agricultural Revolution in  American Agriculture.33 Undoubtedly, many important features that characterize modern American farming emerged during the postWorld War  II decade. Unlike the  first, the second  agricultural revolution bypassed no  major farming region in the  country, and  its  timing deserves more attention than it has  hitherto received. Many scholars have  attributed the tremendous increase in tractors and  other equipment on  farms to the severe labor shortfall and the high wartime farm incomes and savings of  this era.34 Obviously, high farm incomes and  savings  permitted investments with lower-priced farmers' own  funds.35  More significant,

- 33  The first  Agricultural Revolution occurred during the  Civil War  Era, 1850s to  1870s. See  Rasmussen  (1%2).
- U  Street (1957), pp.  77, 177; Rasmussen  (1962);  Fulmer (19X.3),  p.  4. 3J  Note that the  richer farmers were the  ones  most  likely to  increase
- their investment because  having  greater net  worth they faced lower interest rates,  and  by the  same reasoning the  opportunity cost  of  their internally generated funds  was  lower. On  how interest rates VW for borrowers and  lenders in different income groups, see for example,  Haveman (1969).

though,  for  the mechanization explosion was the fact that shifts in factor prices  favored mechanization.  As  was  indicated  earlier, mechanizing small  farms  became  increasingly  economical  as the  acreage on  which tractors  and other  equipment  could  be employed profitably declined between  the  1930s  and  1940s.  Meanwhile,  crop acreage harvested  per farm rose, as did  cotton  acreage. For  the South, cotton acreage per farm  rose from 22  to  39  acres between  1930 and  1964. The  increase in  average cotton  acreage  was  most  impressive  in  the  Southwest,  from 40 to  95 acres; in  the Delta,  from 15 to  32 acres; and  minimal  in the  Southeast, from  15 to  16 acres.36 he  combined  effects  of  a decrease in the  size of T a mechanizable farm  and  an increase in  the average  size of  the farmespecially  the former-increased the  relative frequency  density of  tractorizable  farms  and,  therefore,  facilitated mechanization.

The  role  of  technical  progress  in  the  agricultural implement  sectorprogress  that  made it  possible to  design and make tractors  that  accommodated the  farmers' varied  circumstances and  needs-is often  underrated  with  respect  to  its  role  in  the  diffusion of  innovations. But  it  is quite  important. For  instance,  in  the  1940s  the  farm  implement  sector was  aware  of  the  potential  market  represented  by  small farmers  who, for  various  reasons, had not been able to participate  in the mechanization revolution that  was  underway at  the  time.  Efforts to  reach  into  this market,  which  was concentrated  in the  South, resulted in  the small and minitractors  that were efficient  and reliable.37  This  enabled small farmers to  own  tractors  without having  to  make  drastic  changes in  the  organization  and sizes of  their  farms  in  order  to accommodate the larger  machines.  The  influence  of  these forces  manifested  themselves  in  the  accelerated  and  more  widespread  adoption  of  tractors  and  the  eventual demise of  the  work  horse and  the  mule.

Further,  the diffusion  of  tractors,  as  well  as other farm  machines, was facilitated by  the  availability of  an  extensive  array  of  complementary implements  that technology  provided. This  permitted  farmers  to  exploit the  full potential of each  machine.  During the  mid-  and  late  1940s a number  of  'inventions' -an improved rotary hoe  (mechanical  cotton chopper),  the  flame  cultivator, herbicides  for weed control,  and  above all, the mechanical cotton picker-virtually permitted  the complete mechanization  of  cotton  production. The  existence of  this  'mechanization complex' increased the attractiveness  of  tractors to  cotton growers  and

a6  Calculated from U.S. Census of Agriculture, 1964, Vol. 1 (1965) Pts.  26-28, 31-37 (1%5), pp.  7, 16.  The Southeast includes Alabama, Florida, Georgia, the Carolinas, and Virginia; the Delta includes Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and  Tennessee; the Southwest includes Texas  and  Okalahoma. Most of  the  increase in  acreage occurred in  the  195Os, probably reflecting the  effects of the  new  technologies which had been  adopted in  the 1940s and  early 1950s. ' See  Hilliard (1972), pp.  2-6; Davis  et  al. (1972),  pp. 379-386.

speeded up  their diffusion. It is a  measure of  the complexity of  factors affecting mechanization during the 1940s  that even undramatic changes in cultural practices may have  been  critical. Fulmer points out that tractorization in the Southeast was  helped by  the abandonment of  terraces and  contour farming with its short rows  for strip farming and  the elimination of short rows.38

Given the  trends in relative prices and  the  technological developments described above, as  well as  changes in the location of  production, it is not surprising that during the  two  decades  following U.S. entry in World War II, farm tractorization and mechanization in general in the South assumed stupendous proportions. That cotton growers were actively participating in the Second Agricultural Revolution was  obvious even to casual observers.

IV

Let me make a  few  concluding remarks. First, when one examines closely the  diffusion pattern of  tractors in  the  Cotton South, one  is  struck by its similarity to that of the non-South. Surely, there are  timing differences if  one  examines the  usual S-shaped diffusion curve.39  Everything happens later in the Cotton South relative to the non-South. However, these differences can  be  largely explained by  technological and/or economic factors. The non-South not only faced a  price structure more favorable to farm mechanization, but also had at  least a  decade's head start over the South because prior to the 1920s  available tractors were not suitable for use  in the South's main crops. And shortly after the general-purpose tractor became available, agriculture, and  shortly thereafter  the  entire economy, was engulfed by  America's most serious depression. The Depression obviously put a  damper on  all investment activity.

Economic conditions in the 1940s and  1950s were  much more favorable to the diffusion of  tractors, and these decades witnessed a  tremendous increase in tractors as  well as  in those of farms owning tractors. The increasing relative scarcity of  inputs more important to  the  mule process, such  as  labor, and  the  relatively elastic supplies of  inputs more important to  the tractor process, as well as technical progress in  the manufacturing of  tractors, all contributed to the rapid diffusion of  tractors during this period. Timely changes in tractor design and size resulted in virtually every farmer being able to  find a  tractor that fitted his  needs  rather than having to  modify his  operations to  fit  the  machine. Consequently, tractor power  became accessible to  most farmers rather than  being the  preserve of  a  minority.

Secondly,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  tractor  was only  one  of  many innovations that  became available  to  cotton  farmers  during  the  period 1925-1960. In  fact,  as noted earlier,  the cotton picker  has received  more attention  than  the  tractor, indeed  more  than  any  other  innovation in cotton  production since the cotton  gin.  But the harvest  was only  one of several  bottlenecks, the others being thinning  and weed control,  that had to  be  overcome  before  hand  operations  could  be expelled  from  the  industry.  Elimination of  these  bottlenecks  undoubtedly speeded up  the diffusion of  tractors,  but  adoption  of  the tractor,  by  accentuating these bottlenecks  presaged complete  mechanization.

Finally, tractorization (and mechanization)  unleashed dynamic  forces that  compelled  the  farmer to  reorganize  his farm,  change the  product mix,  and  impelled him  toward more  capital-intensive techniques.  By increasing  efficiency  and by freeing  the farmer  from  dependence on relatively inelastic  factor supplies,  mechanization  pointed  to  further efficiency  and greater  income through  expansion and scale economies. We thus find  that  small farms  decrease rapidly  after  the  1940s  and,  incidentally,  with  them  the  market  for  which  small and mini-tractors  had been designed.  Further,  the  size of  the  average  tractor  as well  as that  of  the average  farm  increase considerably.  These changes are partially  responsible for  the concentration  of  cotton  production  in the non-Southeastern states which  are  better  suited  to  mechanization,  and  therefore have  a comparative advantage  in  cotton  production  under  the new  technology. All  these changes had profound social and economic consequences and constitute  an intriguing  chapter  in  the economy history  of  the American South.  But  that  is another  story.

## APPENDIX: PREHARVEST OPERATIONS: I N P U T S AND  COSTS

The  inputs  on  which  costs were  based were  ascertained  from  field studies dating  mostly from  the period  to which  the cost estimates refer.qo For  the  tractor process the  inputs  include  the  tractor  (20-29  hp  at the draw  bar)  and  its  associated equipment,  gasoline,  oil,  repairs,  and  the operator's  labor  time. The  tractor's  useful life  was estimated at 15  years, and  repairs  at  120% of  its  purchase price.  It  consumed  1.76 gallons of gasoline and  0.22 quarts  of  oil  per  hour  of  operation.

The  inputs into  the mule process include  workstock,  equipment,  feed, service  labor  for animals,  and  operator's  labor  time.  Service  labor  per animal  was  estimated  at  54 hr  per  year.  The  amount  and type  of  feed varied  from  state to  state. And  for  some feed produced  on  the farm  but not  marketed,  no  price  series were  available;  its cost in  on-base years was indirectly  estimated from  the  U.S.  feed  index.

@ Sources for  data are Starbird and  Vermeer (1961); Long (1931); Gaines and  Crowe (1950); Butler (1950); Russell (1931); U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (1948); Magee et  01. (1944); American Society of  Agricultural Engineers (1959), p.  106;  and  for  more detailed cost  estimates, Musoke (1976), pp.  248-255.

The operator's and  tractor or  workstock hours  per  acre  are  as follows:

|                 |   Tractor/driver |   Workstockloperator |
|-----------------|------------------|----------------------|
| Mississippi     |            13.22 |                30.76 |
| South  Carolina |             6.2  |                20.46 |
| Texas           |             2.65 |                 3.8  |

Total costs  were  computed for  each  process according to  the  relevant expression in Eq. (1)  in the text for all relevant inputs for 1935-1959. Costs for 1930  and 1933  were  derived indirectly by  extrapolating 1935 costs backward using a  weighted farm cost  index. The price data came from U.S. Department of Agriculture Statistical Bulletins Nos. 85, 88, 115, 177, 208, 278, 311, and 319  and U.S. Department of  Agriculture, Crops  and  Markets, 194946; U.S. Department of Agriculture (1951); U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm  Labor 1957-59. Tractor prices for  Mississippi for 1941-1959 were  obtained from Professor Richard Day of the University of  Wisconsin. These data came from his unpublished research materials which he  obtained from unpublished data from the U  .  S  . Department of  Agriculture.

## REFERENCES

American Society  of  Agricultural Engineers (1959), Yearbook.

Bray, J.,  and  Watkins, P.  (1964), 'Technological Change  in Corn  Production in  the  United

States, 1870-1960. 'Journal of Farm Economics 46,  751-65.

Brodell, A. P.,  and  Ewing, J.-A. (1948), 'Use of  Tractor Power, Animal Power and  hand methods in Crop  Production.' Washington, D.C.: Bureau of  Agricultural Economics, FM-69, U.S.  Department of  Agriculture, July  1948.  P.  27.

Brodell, A. P.,  and Kendall, A. R.  (1950), 'Life of  Farm Tractors,' Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of  Agric., FM 80,  June.

Butler, C.  P.  (1950), Cotton Production Practices and  Requirements in South Carolina. Clemson: South Carolina Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No.  387.

Butler, C. P.,  and  Crawford, D.  E.  (1948),  Economics of Tractor Farming in  the  Piedmont Area of South Carolina. S.  Carolina Agric. Expt. Clemson: South Carolina Agric. Exp. Sta,  Bul. No. 377.

Butler, C. P.,  and Crawford, D. E. (1948b) The Use  of Tractor Power on Very  Large Farms. South  Carolina Bul. 371.

Danhof, C.  H. (1%9), Change in Agriculture: The  Northern United States, 1820-1870. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.

David, P.  (1975), 'The Mechanization of  Reaping in  the  Antebellum Midwest,' In Technical Choice, Innovation, and  Economic Growth, New  York: Cambridge Univ. Press. Davis, L., et al. (1972) American Economic Growth: An Economist's History of the United States. New York: Harper &amp;  Row.

Day,  R.  (1%7), 'The Economics of  Technological Change  and  the  Demise  of the  Sharecropper.' American Economic Review  57,  427-449.

De&amp;trio, S.  (1973), 'Cotton Overproduction in Late Nineteenth Century Southern Agriculture.' Journal of Economic History 25,  608-33.

Dieffenbach, E.  M., and  Gray,  R. B.  (1960),  'The Development of the  Tractor.' In  USDA, Power to  Produce: Yearbook of Agriculture 1960.

Ferrier, W. T. (1940), Short-Term Credit for Agricultural Production. Clemson: South Carolina Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No. 327.

Fite, G. C.  (1950), 'Recent Progress in the  Mechanization of  Cotton Production.' Agricultural History 24, 19-28.

Fulmer, L.  (1950),  Agricultural Progress in the  Cotton Belt Since  1920.  Chapel Hill: Univ. of  North Carolina Press.

Gabbard, L. P.  and  Jones,  F.  R.  (1927), Large-Scale Cotton  Production in Texas.  College Station: Texas Agric, Exp. Sta.  Bul. No. 362.  Station.

Games,  J. P.,  and  Crowe, Q.  B.,  (1950) Workstock vs. Tractors in  the  Yazoo-Mississippi Delta. Mississippi Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No.  470,  State  College.

Gray, R. 3. (1954), Development of  the  Agricultural Tractor in the United States. St. Joseph,  Mich.: American Society of  Agricultural Engineers.

Griliches, Z. (1957), 'Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technical Change.' Econometrica 25,  501-522.

Haveman, Robert (1%9) 'The Opportunity Cost  of  Displaced Private Spending and  the Social Discount Rate.' Water  Resources Research 5,  947-957.

Hayami, Y.,  and  Ruttan, V.  (1971), Agricultural Development: An  International Perspective.  Baltimore: Johns  Hopkins Univ. Press.

Hilliard, S.  B.  (1972), 'The Dynamics of  Power: Recent  Trends in  the  Mechanization of the  American Farm.' Technology and  Culture 13,  2-6.

Hoover, C.,  and  Rut&amp;ford, B.  U.  (1951), Economic Resources and  Policies of  the  South, New York: MacMillan.

Johnson, C.  S., et  al. (1935), The  Collapse of  Cotton Tenancy. Chapel Hill: The Univ. of  North Carolina Press.

Jones,  L.  R. (1977), 'The Mechanization of Reaping  and  Mowing in  American Agriculture, 1833-1870: Comment' Journal of  Economic History 37,  451-455.

Lindsey, M. M. (l%l), An Economic Analysis of  Custom Work  on  Farms in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta. Mississippi Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No. 295,  State  College.

Long, L. E.  (1931) Farm  Power in the  Yuzoo-Mississippi Delta. Mississippi Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul, No. 295,  State  College.

Magee, A. C.,  Bonnen, C.  A., and  Thibodeau, B.  H.  (1944), Ir$ormation Basic to  Farm Adjustment in the High Plains Area of  Texas. College Station: Texas Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No. 652.

Mandle, J. R.  (1978), The Roots  of Black  Poverty:  The  Southern Plantation Economy  after the  Civil War.  Durham, N.C.: Duke Univ. Press.

Mitchell, B. (1947), Depression Decade: From New Era through New Deal, 1929-1941. New York: Rinehart.

Musoke, M. S.  (1976), Technical Change in Cotton .Production in the United States, 192560. Ph.D  Dissertation, University of  Wisconsin, Madison.

National Cotton  Council of America (1947),  Cotton  Farms  Classt@ed by Acreage Harvested. Memphis.

Olmstead, A. L. (1975) 'The Mechanization of  Reaping and  Mowing in American Agriculture, 1833-1870.' Journal of  Economic History 35,  327-52.

Parker, W.  N., and  Klein, J.  L. (1966), 'Productivity Growth in Gram Production in the United States, 1840-60 and 1900-10,' In Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, Output, Employment and  Productivity in  the  United  States  tier 1800:  Studies in Income and Wealth, 30,  New York.

Pomfret, R. (1976), 'The Mechanization of  Reaping in Nineteenth Century Ontario: A Case  Study  of the  Pace  and  Causes  of the  Diffusion of  Embodied Technical Change.' Journal of  Economic History 36,  399-415.

Ransom,  R.,  and  Sutch,  R. (1972),  'Debt Peonage  in  Southern Agriculture After the  Civil War.' Journal of  Economic History 32,  641-69.

Rasmussen,  W.  D.  (1%2), 'The Impact  of Technological Change  on  American Agriculture, 1862-1962.' Journal of  Economic History 22,  578-591. Rogin, L. (1931), The  Introduction of  Farm Machinery in its  Relation to  the  Productivity

of Labor in  Agriculture of  the  United States  During the  Nineteenth Century.  Berkeley: Univ. of  California Press.

Rosenberg, N. (1972), Technology and  American Economic Growth. New York: Harper Torchbooks.

Rosenberg, N. (1976), Perspectives on Technology. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.

- Russell, B. A. (1931), Farm Power Utilization and Costs  in South Carolina, Clemson: South Carolina Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No.  288.

Smith, H.  P.  and  Jones,  D.  L.  (1948), Mechanized Production ofcotton in  Texas.  College Station: Texas Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No. 704.

Starbird, I. R.,  and  Vermeer, J.  (l%l), Tractors and  Preharvest Equipment Delta Area, Mississippi: Costs of Owning and  Operating by Size  of Farm, 1957. Washington, D.C.: U.S.D.A. Agricultural Economics Report No. 2.

Stephens, P.  H. (1931) 'Mechanization of  Cotton Farms.' Journal of Farm Economics 13,  27-36.

Street, J.  H.  (1957), The  New  Revolution in the  Cotton Economy: Mechanization and  its Consequences. Chapel Hill: Univ. of  North Carolina Press.

Tang, A. (1958), Economic Development in the  Southern Piedmont, 1870-1950. Chapel Hill: Univ. of  North Carolina Press.

- U.S.  Census  of  Agriculture (1930; 1940;  1950;  1954;  1959; and 1964),  Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Govt. Printing Office.
- U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1%7), Agricultural Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt.  Printing Office.
- U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1971), Agricultural Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt.  Printing O&amp;e.
- U.S.  Department of Agriculture (1948),  'Tractor Fuel  Consumption.' FM  69, Washington, D.C.
- U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (1951), Farm Wage  Rates  Revised,  19104948. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt.  Printing O&amp;e.
- U.S.  Department of Agriculture (Annual), Crops  and  Markets, 1949-56, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt.  Printing Oflice.

U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (1949), Feed  Statistics. Statis.  Bul. No.  85,  Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Govt. Printing Oflice.

U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1950), Livestock on  Farms and  Ranches, January I, Number, Value and Classes, 1920-39 by  States. Statis, Bul. No. 88,  Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Govt. Printing Oflice.

U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1952), Farm Production, Farm Disposition, and Value of Principal Field Crops, Revised  Estimates, 19444949, by  States. Statis, Bul. No. 115.  Washington D.C.: U.S. Govt.  Printing O&amp;e.

U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (1955),  Livestock and  Poultry Inventory, January 1, Number, Value, and  Classes,  by States,  2940-54. Statis. Bul. No.  177, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt.  Printing Office.

U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (1957), Field and  Seed  Crops, by States. 194944. Statis. Bul. No.  208.  Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Govt.  Printing Ofhce.

U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (l%la), Livestock on  Farms,  1955-60. Washington, DC.: U.S.  Govt.  Printing Ofice.

U.S.  Department of Agriculture (l%lb), Field and Seed  Crop Production, Farm Use, Sales and  Value. Statis, Bul, No.  311.  Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Govt.  Printing Oflice. U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1%2), Prices Paid by  Farmers for Commodities and Services, Speci7ied Months, United States, 1910-1960. Statis. Bul. 319.  Washington, D.C.: U.S.  Govt. Printing O&amp;e.

U.S. Department of  Agriculture (1957-1959), Farm Labor. Washington, DC.

U.S.  Department of  Agriculture (I%@, Statistics on  Cotton and  Related Data. Statis.  Bul. No. 417.  Washington, DC.: U.S.  Govt.  Printing Office. Varden, M.  G.,  Smith, J. O.,  and  Eyres,  W.  E.  (1931) Making Cotton  Cheaper. Mississippi

Agric. Expt. Sta.  Bul. No.  290,  State  College. Woodward, C.  V. (1957), The  Origins of  the  New South. Baton Rouge: Louisiana Univ.

Press.