## Replacing humans with machines: a historical look at technology politics in California agriculture

<!-- image -->

Patrick Baur 1 · Alastair Iles

2

Accepted: 27 June 2022 / Published online: 12 July 2022

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2022

## Abstract

Media outlets, industry researchers, and policy-makers are today busily extolling new robotic advances that promise to transform agriculture, bringing us ever closer to self-farming farms. Yet such techno-optimist discourse ignores the cautionary lessons of past attempts to mechanize farms. Adapting the Social Construction of Technology framework, we trace the history of efforts to replace human labor with machine labor on fruit, nut, and vegetable farms in California between 1945 and 1980-a place and time during which a post-WWII culture of faith in the beneficence of technoscience applications to agriculture reached an apex. The degree to which and forms whereby mechanization gains momentum hinges on whether, how, and among whom a technological frame for mimicking human capabilities and supplanting workers coalesces. These frames, we find, vary considerably across crops, reflecting complex interactions of biology, farmer and farm worker behavior, industry supply chains, agricultural research and development, financial flows, and beliefs about labor, race, gender, and immigration. To tease out these complex dynamics, we draw directly from archival evidence to follow the development of cultivation and harvest machines through four cases spanning a spectrum of outcomes-tomatoes, nuts, peaches, and lettuce. In comparing across these cases, we find that although agricultural engineers, scientists, and their boosters framed mechanization as a triumphal narrative of progress in 'human vs. nature' conflicts, this techno-optimist rhetoric camouflaged deeper 'human vs. human' conflicts, particularly among agribusiness, farmers, and farm workers. We conclude with several insights that this historical study brings to the study of agricultural automation today.

Keywords Mechanization · Specialty crops · Labor · California · Social construction of technology · Politics of expertise ·

Technological momentum

## Abbreviations

R&amp;D

Research and development

SCOT

Social construction of technology

UC

University of California

UCCE

University of California Cooperative Extension

UFW

United Farm Workers

USDA

United States Department of Agriculture

*

Patrick Baur

pbaur@uri.edu

Alastair Iles iles@berkeley.edu

- 1 Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems Program, Department of Fisheries, Animal, and Veterinary Sciences, University of Rhode Island, 120 Flagg Rd., Kingston, RI 02881, USA
- 2 Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of California, Berkeley, 130 Mulford Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

## Introduction

Agricultural robots loom large in the future envisioned for food systems (Klerkx and Rose 2020; Daum 2021). In the United States, for example, media outlets from the Los Angeles Times to The New Yorker excitedly publish articles on robotic advances that promise to transform agriculture (Mohan 2017; Seabrook 2019) and bring us 'one step closer to self-farming farms' (Estes 2022). Contemporary fascination with robots, artificial intelligence, big data, and other Silicon Valley-inspired technology unwittingly echoes past attempts to mechanize farms. Failure to learn the lessons of that history risks retreading the same messy, conflict-laden, and unjust pathways of agrarian technological development as those revealed in our analysis.

In this paper, we trace the history and politics of efforts to replace human labor with cultivation and harvest machines on California farms between 1945 and 1980. The public arguments made for an 'age of robot farmers' today

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(Seabrook 2019) were also made in that place and time, particularly in the 1960s, when the momentum to mechanize cultivation and harvest of vegetables, fruits, and nuts reached an apex. As Henke (2008) documents, in the years following WWII agribusiness, growers, and the state accelerated their efforts to mobilize technoscience to fix what they saw as California's perpetual farm labor crisis.  Despite large 1 investments of time, resources, and passion into experiments with machines that could mimic human capabilities and supplant workers, the anticipated future of fully mechanized farms was hardly realized. Over 200 fruits, vegetables, and nuts are grown in California today (California Department of Food and Agriculture 2021), yet these crops remain largely unmechanized in the sense that although growers deploy numerous machines, they still rely on hundreds of thousands of seasonal and migrant workers to labor alongside these mechanical 'aids' (Martin et al. 2017). As a longtime scholar of California farm labor observes, 'A large fruit or vegetable grower transported from the 1950s to today would marvel at laser-guided ground-leveling equipment, drip irrigation, and computers, but be very familiar with crews of Mexican-born farm workers picking fruits and vegetables' (Martin 2011). This suggests we need to look critically at the dynamics and politics of farm mechanization.

To do so, we adapt a social construction of technology (SCOT) framework to trace the ways in which agricultural machines develop as part of a socio-technical network, encountering farms and crops in the structural context of a capitalized agrarian political economy, and embodying the biases and priorities of social groups who produce and use these machines. Our research questions the ways in which machines are socially constructed to replace human labor: the design, prototyping, experimentation, challenges, and feed-backs that enable machines to substitute for human agency (or not). Much existing agrarian political economy scholarship, as we show, tends to characterize mechanization as an external driver that impels change in labor and capital relations in farm fields. Simultaneously, SCOT scholarship rarely integrates political economic structures and conditions into its account of how technologies are made, such as the pre-existing racialized labor hierarchies and capitalization dynamics that agricultural social science has long revealed. By bringing these theoretical perspectives more into intersection, we hope to illuminate the path-dependent interplay between machines and farms.

Drawing on extensive primary archives of industry trade magazines and University of California extension reports,

<!-- image -->

we argue that the degree to which and forms whereby mechanization succeeds in mimicking human capabilities and supplanting workers varies considerably across crops-reflecting complex interactions of biology, farmer and farm worker behavior, industry supply chains, agricultural research and development, financial flows, and beliefs about labor, race, gender, and immigration. Past scholarship has established that crop characteristics can influence the feasibility of mechanization and that introducing machines can reshape farm work, farms, and crops profoundly. We extend and specify these broad observations by asking precisely how and why machines follow different trajectories for different crops, leading to different mechanization outcomes. We attend to the work of farmer-innovators, equipment manufacturers, university researchers, industry groups, and others to find 'solutions' for numerous technical challenges as filtered through their competing assumptions and agendas. Our study is novel not only in its attention to the nuanced interplay between machine development and both politicaleconomic and biophysical conditions of agriculture, but also in our case comparison methodology that looks beyond the dynamics apparent from analyzing single crops.

We first briefly review the agricultural social science on farm mechanization before discussing how we leverage this perspective to expand the classic SCOT framework and inform a deeper historical analysis of technological development and machine politics. We then explain our research methods before outlining the period-specific, macro-scale characteristics of California's agriculture pertinent to mechanization, as revealed in our primary source data. We work through four cases-tomatoes, nuts, peaches, and lettuceto demonstrate that mechanization outcomes can span a wide spectrum from extensive replacement of human labor to the adoption of mechanical 'aids' to the relative absence of machines. Finally, we analyze key findings from those cases and draw some conclusions relevant to automated agriculture today.

## Theoretical background

Much previous scholarship pertinent to mechanization comes from the field of agrarian political economy, which tends to subsume the development and deployment of farm machinery within broader accounts of the Agrarian Question. Originating with Kautsky (1988 [1899]), this question asked whether agriculture would exhibit the same capitalization tendencies as Marx first observed and theorized in manufacturing-the consolidation of small holdings by ever larger holdings and the 'proletarianization of the masses' whereby most people would be divested of the means of production and reduced to selling their labor for wages. However, contrary to that theory, Kautsky and his contemporaries

observed that smallholder farms were not evenly or predictably giving way to large factory-like, industrial farms.

In these early accounts, mechanization appears as just one facet of the 'scientific and technical conditions of the new agriculture' (Kautsky 1988 [1899], p. 79). Machines, agrochemicals, and technoscientific 'development of the productive forces' in general represented an external factor used to explain the economies of scale that were expected to favor larger holdings. Kautsky and Lenin both acknowledged that scale did not always equate to raw farm acreage due to 'differences in farm asset ownership, cropping patterns, technology, production, sales, debt, and migration' (AkramLodhi and Kay 2010a). However, these early theorists set an enduring precedent for collapsing the internal dynamics of technoscience, and thus of mechanization, into a blackboxed 'condition' to be taken as given by future scholars of the Agrarian Question.

The Agrarian Question was revived in the 1970s and 1980s. Famously, Mann and Dickinson (1978) theorized that smallholder farms persist in the face of capitalization not due to self-exploitation or differences in how new technologies are applied, but because the biophysical reality of agriculture itself-such as seasonal climates, life cycles of crops, and perishability of farm products-poses barriers to capitalization. Critically for our analysis of mechanization, they conclude with the prediction that 'when the conditions of production are sufficiently altered by advances in science, technology, etc. so as to overcome these barriers, then there is no reason to believe that capitalism will not move in and conquer them' (Mann and Dickinson 1978). While Mooney critiqued their argument, he upheld the basic implication that capitalization depends on mechanization's degree of success in 'levelling… labor time across the production cycle,' noting that an 'inability to further mechanize fruit and nut production, dairy or poultry' sets these farms apart from highly capitalized sectors such as cotton or grains (1982, p. 288). Intriguingly, however, both the Mann-Dickinson thesis and Mooney's critique follow the earlier precedent of treating mechanization itself as an independent, external development-Mooney goes so far as to imply that mechanization is not a social relation (1982, p. 289), a view which runs counter to the foundational premise of SCOT.

This trend continued as agricultural social scientists began to reformulate the agrarian question to ask how capital responds to the limits and resistances to accumulation in agriculture (Akram-Lodi and Kay 2010b). Drawing on grounded ethnographic methods, several thick descriptions of relations between capital and labor in California agriculture added depth and specificity to the ways in which machines altered the conditions of production, often to the detriment of farmworkers and the benefit of large growers and labor bosses. For example, Wells (1996) demonstrated that strawberry growers had developed processes for

reducing labor costs while still retaining the high skill and knowledge needed to harvest berries, such as paying workers at piece rates and exploiting the vulnerability of undocumented Latinx workers. Wells briefly mentions that several biological characteristics of strawberries have impeded mechanization and alludes to exuberant late-1970s industry forecasts of new machines. Thomas (1985) showed how, by the 1980s, labor bosses and growers had manipulated the motorized lettuce wrapping machine not only to drive new racialized and gendered wedges into labor solidarity, but also to exert granular, oppressive control over the pace of field work. Friedland et al. (1981) engaged the administrative and organizational dimensions of changing social relations in lettuce production, treating large grower-shippers not just as capital in relation to labor, but as internally complex entities interacting with a variety of external social forces including the state, other industrial actors in the supply chain, and developments in technoscience.

While each of these studies added significant empirical detail to the Mann-Dickinson thesis that technoscientific products are a critical tool with which capital renders agriculture less 'exceptional' in its resistance to accumulation, most do not question how these technologies came to be. Thomas took the wrapping machine as given, leaving aside its history or introduction; likewise, Wells did not inquire further into the process of mechanization, including how UC researchers and equipment managers repeatedly struggled to devise machine prototypes that 'worked'. Friedland et al. (1981) are the partial exception. They asserted 'disagreement with a technological determinist view of change' (p. 130) and made some arguments that technologies could have developed differently.  Yet their analysis shied away from a 2 deep dive into the sociotechnical network, particularly the biological and environmental agencies, that shaped development of the central machine in their story, the mechanical lettuce harvester. They described at length the technical production practices that the technologists proposed the machines would undertake in the field, but still depicted these machines as largely a fait accompli , barring a few minor technical challenges to sort out, that 'stands in the wings' and could be rolled out 'fairly quickly' once growers perceived it would be cheaper than labor (pp. 91-95). In other words, while acknowledging the path-dependence of developing machines that work, they failed to question who decides what it means for a machine to work.

Who designed, funded, and manufactured these farm machines? What values, goals, biases, and assumptions

did they embed in the process? Did they always get their way, and if not, how and why? Under what conditions does agreement about a machine that works emerge? To address these questions and illuminate the technology politics at play within mechanization, we adapt the Social Construction of Technology (SCOT) framework. SCOT centers on the interactions between technologies and their social context (Bijker et al. 1987; Bijker 1995). Classically, SCOT analyses follow how technologies come into existence, take material form, and interact with humans. The emphasis is on understanding the process, not only the product. SCOT offers two critical insights for our study. First, a technology's development and use reflect the politics, including priorities and biases, of the social groups who participate in its design, such as engineers, manufacturers, and financiers. The technology always embeds, to some degree, the criteria of those groups regarding what it should and should not do. For example, a robot must pick fruit without bruising it, or a robot should be more time efficient than the humans it is replacing. These criteria define a 'technological frame' that exerts influence over the cognition, design choices, and behavior involved in developing the technology further. By invoking and translating their respective frames into an emerging technology, social groups shape its configuration. Technologies are initially malleable, reflecting various, possibly competing interpretations among social groups, before solidifying into a 'closed' form that can lead to path dependency.

Second, technologies are always part of a socio-technical network. A machine operates inside a network of other technologies, human actors, behavioral patterns, social norms, and institutions that jointly influence its trajectory and impacts. For instance, a robot is not simply a tool moving through a farm field in isolation. It is continually interacting with, responding to, and being shaped by a farmer's behavior as a user, university extension services, industry engineers, crop markets, and other parts of the network. Importantly, this is a multi-directional interaction- technologies also shape their working environment and the people using that technology. When combined with the notion of path dependency, the concept of a socio-technical network suggests ways in which technological development can 'lock-in' not just a particular machine, but the whole operational, economic, and cultural systems within which that technology operates, resulting from what Hughes (1987) labeled 'technological momentum' in large systems.

While SCOT continues to provide powerful theory for studying technological development, the broader social and environmental implications of technology have not featured prominently. For example, SCOT scholarship has often neglected power disparities among social groups, particularly the ways in which a 'politics of expertise' can emerge to exclude inexpert or 'lay people' from the design process. Often this downgrades the role of those who will use

<!-- image -->

the end technology to passive knowledge-takers. Not only does this bias among technology-focused epistemic communities discount the contributions of practitioners, but analyses that do not account for these exclusions can also overlook the agency of important groups such as workers. Likewise, SCOT tends to focus on 'successful' technologies-those that build momentum and take hold, even lock in-as opposed to 'failed' or still-forming technologies that exist mostly as prototypes or diagrams on paper (Klein and Kleinman 2002). By contrast, Khoo (2005) and Humphreys (2005) argue that SCOT can accommodate ongoing changes in a technology over decades; a technology is never finally formed and can be re-opened through new challenges from social groups. Researchers have acknowledged that users can subsequently play a critical, and sometimes disruptive, role by adopting, modifying, and even making their own technologies (e.g., Kline and Pinch 1996; Oudshoorn and Pinch 2003). Whose criteria for technological 'success' should prevail is under continuous contestation. Technology can thus operate to preserve (or challenge) extant social hierarchies and sites of control.

We build on SCOT's ongoing evolution to add crucial elements. First, resonant with Kloppenburg's (2004) foundational work linking social contexts to the biotechnological trajectory of 'improving' seed germplasm, we integrate the political economic structures that permeate localized, cropspecific mechanization efforts-in our case the dynamic and contested relations of wealth, power, and control among agribusiness, farms, and farm workers (which we delineate further below). This political economy features grossly unequal power relations between farmer and farmworker, between agribusiness and farmer, and between university engineer and agricultural user.

Second, we ask why and how crops and farms respond to machines as they develop, what or who machines are acting on (or trying to act on), for whose benefit, and at whose expense. Thus, we shift the focus of the SCOT framework to examine how plants, farmland, cropping systems, farmers, and workers cooperate (or not) as university researchers, manufacturing companies, engineers and other actors try to devise and deploy machines. Inspired by the envirotech history of Russell et al. (2011), we study multi-directional changes in farm management, and the social and biophysical farm landscapes that emerge, as a result of crops, organisms, land, or ecosystems resisting machines because of their characteristics and behavior. Different social groups may attempt to deal with pushback from these elements by (1) adjusting the technology itself to adapt to the resistance; (2) by changing the environment or organisms to accommodate the technology's needs; or (3) changing views on what constitutes acceptable farm output, for example as supply chains learn to tolerate 'imperfect' crops or additional food waste. We are particularly interested in the divergent

objectives for mechanization among researchers/engineers, manufacturers, banks (which finance mechanization), buyers and processors, and growers. All have a hand in shaping the definition and design of mechanization, but all have different assumptions about why mechanization is needed and what it should accomplish.

## Research methods

We chose California as our primary site because the state was a hotbed of contemporaneous mechanization research and development aimed at diverse fruit, nut, and vegetable specialty crops. Many of the machines now used to plant, weed, thin, prune, spray, or harvest vegetable, fruit, and nut crops around the globe were first designed and used in California. We surveyed the period from 1945 to 1980 to capture the full arc of mechanization processes and techno-optimism beliefs that peaked in the 1960s, beginning with the postwar genesis of intensive mechanization efforts (Binswanger 1986; Valdés 1994) and ending at a time when those efforts were largely dormant. 3

We collected over 1300 primary archival documents related to the mechanization of fruit, vegetable, and nut cultivation and harvest in California from industry newsletters, government reports, oral history transcripts, national media, and local newspapers. In particular, we examined hundreds of issues of the trade journals Western Grower and Shipper which covered the vegetable and grain sectors, and Western Fruit Grower which followed the fruit and nut sectors. We also identified research reports from University of California agricultural experiment stations and cooperative extension specialists studying technical challenges for mechanization. Our analysis covered 9 crops representing a range of cultivation systems as well as degrees of mechanization momentum.  We coded materials that pertained to 4 our sample, using descriptive, in vivo, and process coding strategies (Saldaña 2013). For example, we identified actors (farmers, extension advisors, manufacturers, etc.); reasons/

motivation for mechanization (labor costs, modernization, cheap food, etc.); nature of mechanization (aid, humandriven, automated); barriers (biological, culture, management, supply chain, etc.); and other elements. For each crop, we noted chronological developments and the ways in which machines, crops, farms, and farmers changed over time.

Reliance on archival data limits analysis to the perspectives of those actor groups with sufficient resources, agency, and motivation to inscribe their experiences and views into the archive; every archive is thus partial and also defined by silences and occlusions (Carter 2006; Pearce 2019). In our case, the materials we draw from overrepresent the standpoint of the agricultural industry and land grant university researchers, many of whom had a vested interest in promoting further machine development that stands in contrast to occasional techno-critical views (usually mediated through journalists). Rarely does this archive include the voices of frontline workers, although images of laborers regularly appear. Recognizing these limitations, we approached our analysis by critically reading 'against the grain' (Schwartz and Cook 2002) to help account for techno-optimist bias and bring what is missing to light. This critical tack yields deeper insight into what farmers, researchers, equipment makers, food processors, retailers, and other agents thought and did about mechanization beyond the surface of the written record.

In this paper, we report on three crops with different mechanization trajectories: nuts, peaches, and lettuce-chosen to exemplify the differing trajectories that mechanization can take. We contrast these cases with the tomato harvester case, a quintessential exemplar of 'successful' mechanization in California specialty crops (de la Peña 2013; CarlisleCummins 2015). To distinguish our primary evidence from scholarly articles, we use numbered brackets to reference archival materials from back-issues of industry trade magazines, newspapers, agricultural experiment station reports, and one autobiographical essay. Full bibliographic information is provided in the list of primary documents at the end.

## Macro factors shaping mechanization in California agriculture

From its origins in the mid-nineteenth century, California agriculture has been highly capitalized and industrial. Largely skipping the era of family farms that characterized much early US agriculture, California embraced a businessoriented system built on hired labor and dynamic land markets (Stoll 1998; Walker 2004; Mitchell 2012). The state has thus incubated agrarian capitalism, and 'many of the principal features of 21st-century agro-food systems, such as subcontracting, brand names, petro-farming, feedlots, biotechnology, and concrete dams, were pioneered here'

(Walker 2004, p. 3). We combine insights drawn from primary sources with supporting analysis from secondary sources to summarize several macro factors that encouraged replacing human labor with machines across all four of our cases during this period.

## Agribusiness hegemony

Following WWII, large growers enjoyed a privileged position in setting California's public policy and directing agricultural funding. With little federal government investment (apart from massive irrigation works) or crop subsidization via the Farm Bill, industry groups and crop boards exercised outsized power in shaping research, especially through the cooperative extension and agricultural research station infrastructure of the University of California (Henke 2008). Due to rapid vertical and horizontal integration that tied growers together as a class with powerful economic and lobbying clout, California agribusiness was 'already significantly collectivized and already established on modernist principles that were quite subject to rationalization and planning' (Mitchell 2012, p. 17).  California agriculture thus intri5 cately blended public and private resources and authority into an agrarian capitalist hegemony that primed the industry for further capitalization via technological innovation.

## Rise of agricultural finance and inputs industries

The archival record highlighted the importance of financeaccess to financial capital through loans-and the role of the banking industry in underwriting, and even driving, interest in mechanization. Banks, especially the Bank of America, frequently advertised in farmer magazines extolling the virtues and necessity of mechanization (Fig. 1). Trade associations lobbied banks to free up financial capital for farm mechanization, and we observed that banks sometimes required growers to mechanize in order to receive loans: 'The need for cutting farm operating costs through mechanization points to good business for the agricultural implement industry for many years to come, members of the American Bankers Association were told.'  Earlier, Henderson (1999) 6 showed how California agriculture expanded because of the

<!-- image -->

Fig. 1 Advertisement  for  mechanization  financing  from  Bank  of America. Western Grower and Shipper. February, 1969. Reproduced with permission from Western Grower &amp; Shipper

<!-- image -->

growing availability of credit from rural branch banks, and became highly specialized in crop production in part due to the interest of banks and insurers in minimizing their own risks.

Larger loans to purchase more expensive mechanical inputs correlates with the emergence of larger farm sizes. As Binswager (1986) generalized, 'Mechanization is the main facilitator of the trend toward bigger farms… [and] large farms adopt new forms of machinery considerably faster than small farms. Because larger farms offer more collateral, they make it easier to borrow to invest in new machinery.' Banks also had a vested interest in ensuring high land values-which growers used as collateral when borrowing money to fund capital upgrades or seasonal expenditures-and thus in ensuring that rising human labor costs did not disrupt the agricultural profits to be made from industrial farms.

The financial institutions understood this logic… Any disruption to the labor system would have had negative impacts on the banks as well as on the landowners (Runsten and LeVeen 1981, p. 25).

Banks were not the only industry invested in mechanizing agribusiness. Following WWI, and accelerating after WWII, a new chemicals industry was busily convincing farmers that petrochemical fertilizers and pesticides would make their lives easier by smoothing the unpredictable vicissitudes of farming. Agrichemicals, which can be applied quickly, in high volumes, and over large areas, helped standardize farm fields (e.g., by killing weeds) and achieve the uniformity  required by machine harvesters. Advertisements for agrichemicals filled the pages of trade journals throughout our study period.

## Positive past experiences with mechanization

As historians Olmstead and Rhodes (1988) contend, 'early innovations paved the way for subsequent development.' From about 1860 to 1890, wheat dominated California agriculture, and farmers adopted the combine harvester-thresher, which was first imported from Michigan in 1854 (Bainer 1975). California agriculture then transitioned to non-cereal crops including grapes, tree fruits and nuts, vegetables, sugar beets, cotton, and rice (Miller 1960). 'What General Motors did for automobiles by assembling a line of different products and changing models… California agribusiness did for fruits and vegetables' (Walker 2004, p. 52). Specialty crops were grown with mass production methods-including labor-intensive harvest assembly-lines with all the dehumanizing and oppressive tendencies of factories (McWilliams 2000 [1939])-as commodity crops to be sold across the nation and world. During the 1920s and 1930s, growers, public sector scientists and engineers, and manufacturers worked together to mechanize cotton, rice, and sugar beet harvests (Olmstead and Rhodes 1988; Henke 2008). Agribusiness perceived sugar beets as a dramatic success in adapting to the sudden labor shortage caused by WWII with rapid mechanization, saving this industry from collapse (Bainer 1975; Henke 2008).

The fruit, nut, and vegetable sectors viewed these other cropping systems as comparative benchmarks for their own technological aspirations: 'The perishable vegetable groups,' said the managing director of Western Grower and Shipper in 1952, 'are probably farther behind in the development of labor saving machines than any other agricultural industry throughout the nation' [1]. It is against the backdrop of these early mechanization 'success' stories that we must evaluate and interpret efforts to mechanize fruits and vegetables during the middle decades of the twentieth century. By the 1940s, California specialty crop growers could tap into a rich social capital built up over the past 80 years into a dense network including university scientists, agricultural engineers, banks, and machine manufacturers. This network, and the resources it could mobilize, promised to enable rapid proliferation of technology from conception to

design to implementation, all toward the goal of enriching agribusiness.

## Downstream demand for 'mass output' pulls farms to mechanize

Trends toward mass consumerism during this period simultaneously pulled California growers toward mechanization to better align with expectations for factory-like speed and uniformity in production. The post-war period of prosperity saw rapid changes in consumer market demands and in the structure and nature of food retail, both driven by a desire for convenience. First, there was a shift toward cheap and uniform food available everywhere, year-round. Demand increased for one-stop food shopping venues, i.e., supermarkets. In addition, retailers and distributors transitioned from local to regional and even national chains. The effects on growers, and in particular on projections of the need to mechanize, are encapsulated in a visionary 1962 story titled, 'The Vegetable Industry, 2000 A.D.'

With the continued accent on convenience, more and more food will go to processing until, by 2000, 70 percent of the California crop is canned or frozen or handled in some new way. This change will force growers to mechanize more and more to meet the needs of the food manufacturers and will accentuate the trend to uniformity in products (emphasis added). [2]

Efforts to mechanize farms also responded to the increasingly factory-like conditions in packing and processing facilities. As numerous articles in Western Grower &amp; Shipper and Western Fruit Grower attest, beginning in the 1940s and rapidly accelerating in the 1950s, vegetable, fruit, and nut supply chains embraced bulk-handling by replacing handheld crates with large bins that had to be moved with a forklift or dump-truck (see also Martin 1987). 'You can go broke in a hurry if you're not geared for mass output,' opined one packer in 1956, who recommended 'you've got to have a production line that's mechanized from start to finish' [3]. Pressures radiated upstream to increase throughput. Against this mass output drive, the farm was increasingly seen as a bottleneck in the supply chain.

## Deep divides between farm owners and farm workers

The long-running friction between farm owners and farm workers dominates mechanization trajectories. Historically, and still today, grower interest in mechanization correlates with the availability and cost of farm labor. As Western Grower and Shipper explained in 1952,

In 1927 there was no market for vegetable machinery… It was a hopeless task trying to sell labor-saving machinery to these growers… [But] when confronted with the [New Deal era minimum] wage-and-hour law they became immediately more interested in securing labor saving machinery [4].

Yet this correlation between perceived labor cost and mechanization is an artifact of a deeper and older social rift that places growers at the top of a steep hierarchy of racialized and gendered labor power that agricultural social scientists have long documented throughout California's agrarian history (e.g. McWilliams 2000 [1939] 1999 [1949]; Thomas 1985; Wells 1996; Stoll 1998; Mitchell 2012).

Owner-work relations have taken the form of extreme and persistent inequality in power since the late nineteenth century. As Wells (1996) and Mitchell (2012) argue, the Bracero Program-an agreement between the United States and Mexico, dating to the acute domestic labor shortages of WWII, which allowed certain industries to seasonally import Mexican workers-was instrumental in driving a wedge between those who 'belong' in California agriculture and those who do not. Moreover, by the 1940s, racial formations in California had already ossified the class divide between the white growers who owned land (and farm machines) and the non-white farm workers, many of them migrant, who cultivated the land (Stoll 1998; Almaguer 1994). Culturally, the importation of 'pastoral dreams' into California had long devalued physical farm work, which the new capitalist class of farm owners eschewed: 'Farm labor would not only be the least desirable work, but only the 'least desirable' people would do it' (Martin 2001).

An 'axis of power' among farm owners, land-grant universities, growers' associations, and elected representatives institutionalized this divide through law and policy. For example, after Japanese immigrant farm workers began to purchase land and establish their own independent farms, the white axis of power successfully lobbied for passage of the 1913 and 1920 Alien Land Acts, which barred Japanese people from owning land in California. The rift between owners and laborers in California agriculture deepened progressively through waves of immigration, which included Chinese, Armenian, Japanese, and Filipino immigrants as well as poor white migrants fleeing the Dust Bowl.  Jain 7 (2006, p. 66) argues that a 'cycle of using cheap labor then maliciously dispossessing groups when they organized themselves was typical in California agriculture.'

<!-- image -->

The hierarchies of power constructed and maintained through confluences of race and class are fundamentally inscribed in the technological trajectories of farm machines in  California.  As  Martin  (2001)  argues,  'technologies became a fundamental tool and target  for  farm  owner power.' So, for example, there are references in industry trade magazines to new prototype machines as 'iron braceros' [6] at the same time that growers referred to themselves as 'labor users' and Mexican braceros were rendered passive, merely 'a bystander while the arguments and the action swirled around him' [7]. White farm owners racially objectified Mexican farm workers as 'naturally' suited to the transient, physically brutal conditions of farm work (Martin 2001; Stoll 1998). In the context of machines envisioned and designed to replace human labor, the racially-laden and stereotyping language deployed by growers to objectify and devalue farm workers takes on a particularly sinister cast. Take, for example, Friedland and Barton's comment that, 'Traditionally used to having cheap, abundant, and docile labor, most growers felt that agricultural labor required little skill, but lots of muscle and docility' (1975, p. 31). The grower preference for 'docility' (by which they meant submission) echoes the language used by white plantation owners to speak of enslaved farm workers in the American south (Desmond 2019; Almaguer 1994). Such language reinforces the power hierarchy that allowed growers and their allies to think of human laborers as interchangeable with machines, just another cog in the field as factory mentality.

## How the 'successful' tomato harvester reached lock-in

From this summary of critical macro-scale characteristics that shaped mechanization trajectories for California specialty crops across the board, we now turn to an examination of how efforts to replace human farmworkers with machines met with very different outcomes in specific cases within this overarching context. To begin, we briefly review the mechanical tomato harvester-widely portrayed as a success story in modern agrarian mechanization-as a baseline case of technological lock-in for our study. In 1960, all tomatoes destined for canneries in California were harvested by hand. By 1970, 99.9% were harvested by machine (Friedland and Barton 1975). Today, tomatoes grown for processing are among the most heavily mechanized specialty crops. Yet the tomato harvester took extensive, long-term effort to become a working technology-or more accurately, as will be seen, one component of a suite of interdependent technologies. At many points along its development trajectory, the tomato harvester nearly failed, and even after its ascendance as the dominant form of harvest the tomato harvester attracted

controversy over the socioeconomic fallout for the smallscale farmers and farmworkers whom it displaced.

In the late 1940s, agronomists and agricultural engineers at the University of California, Davis began trying to invent the harvester. At this time, neither farmers nor the canning industry to whom they sold tomatoes wanted the new technology (de la Peña 2013). However, California's processed tomato industry had several features that facilitated pursuit of a machine to replace human workers. Coming out of WWII, tomatoes were a large and lucrative industry, accounting for 80% of all canned vegetables and nearly 40% of total canned produce. California growers supplied 38% of the nation's processed tomatoes [8]. Processors also held oligopsony power (Just and Chern 1980)-canning tomatoes were grown under contract, with planting acreage and price set before farmers seeded their fields (Friedland and Barton 1975, pp. 19-20). As a result, processed tomatoes represented a valuable, consolidated, and stable commodity. Although agricultural labor was plentiful due to the Bracero program, the economic prominence of the processing tomato sector attracted the attention of university engineers who began to pitch the opportunity for significant cost-savings in a future of farms without workers-which not coincidentally would also justify a greater role for expert technologists and mean a ready market to buy the proposed harvester. 8

Despite these incentives, the new machine did not work at first. Jack Hanna (a plant breeder) and Coby Lorenzen (an agricultural engineer) led teams that tested dozens of prototypes in the 1950s but found repeatedly that the tomatoes tore and split easily with mechanical handling. Farm fields were small, muddy, and uneven, and the machine constantly broke down under field conditions. Friedland and Barton (1975, p. 21) highlighted another challenge:

The rows and beds must be uniform if the machine is to move through the field without damaging the plants. … if tomatoes are to be harvested on schedule and maximum yield are to be obtained, the tomato vines must be ready for harvest simultaneously.

Against these setbacks, the engineers persisted, drawing upon their previous experiences with attempts to mechanize other crops. Hanna spent the first 12 years of his career attempting to mechanize asparagus (de la Peña 2013). His colleagues at UC Davis had extensive experience from developing the sugar beet harvester, and de la Peña (2013) argues  that  the  tomato  harvester  garnered  momentum not only from exaggerated fears over an impending labor

shortage, but also due to the opportunity it presented for men with managerial and scientific expertise to shift power over the fate of an economic powerhouse crop to themselves, and away from farmers. In fact, growers largely ignored, even belittled Hanna's prototype harvesters throughout the 1950s, underscoring the at times divergent interests between technologists and growers.

What made the mechanical harvester possible was enrolling a wider network to redesign tomatoes, machines, and farms. Over several decades, Hanna's team bred a tomato variety that would: (1) withstand rough handling; (2) break easily from the vine with shaking; and (3) mature evenly so the fruit could be harvested all at once (since a machine, unlike human workers, could only pass through the field a single time, after which the plants were destroyed). Farms needed leveling so machines could drive more easily, and had to be larger and dedicated to only tomatoes. Moreover, growers had to pursue uniformity through pesticide control of weeds and pests (demonstrating the coupling of mechanization and chemicalization) and through precision planting and thinning, which could be handled mechanically if the field were sufficiently uniform (demonstrating positive feedback loops among mechanization efforts at different stages in the production process).

What made the machine successful , in terms of building significant momentum, was a convergence of interests around a common technological frame: critically, Hanna's team was joined by a manufacturer (Blackwelder) willing to risk commercial production and large growers finally willing to risk using the new tomato variety and machine when faced with the impending end of the Bracero program. 9 Critically, grower adoption was not trivial, as the harvester required growers to massively reconfigure their cultivation practices and specialize in tomatoes. This entailed a learning process and costly mistakes along the way.

Growers did not see the harvester as an economic necessity until the Bracero program was canceled in 1964, underlining the importance of powerful farmers perceiving they would lose access to cheap, expendable labor (Valdes 1994). The machine still required many workers sitting alongside to process the crop-but these roles were now filled by women, who growers paid at lower rates than male harvest workers (Friedland and Barton 1975, Ch. 4). Moreover, the effects of the mechanical harvester on farmers were neglected. In 1962, around 4,000 farms grew tomatoes for the processing industry. By 1973, there were less than 600. Those remaining grew substantially in size and focused exclusively on tomatoes. This departed from previous attitudes toward

tomato cultivation, which had viewed tomatoes as one piece in a larger, flexible mosaic of crop choices: 'few growers thought of themselves, as tomato growers per se, as tomato specialists. For many growers, tomatoes were a crop requiring no special investment' (Friedland and Barton 1975, p. 63). This concentration and specialization were necessitated both by the mechanical harvester's voraciously expanding capacity-by the mid-1970s, a machine could harvest &gt; 250 acres per season-but also by the intensive cultivation adjustments required to grow a uniform crop suitable for the machine. Growers had to 'think tomatoes' (Friedland and Barton 1975).

The struggles of tomato workers to improve labor conditions, and later to simply keep their jobs, is strikingly absent from this history, we believe, not just because some scholars have been enamored by the glossy story of inventors and entrepreneurs who conjure a technological marvel against all odds, but also because the prime movers in this sociotechnical network were able to isolate their 'technical' work from the 'political' strife between workers and growers until the machine was already in the field. While union organizers in the 1950s and 1960s faced significant challenges in organizing the Braceros who formed 85% of the harvest crews (Valdes 1994), a coalition of small-scale farmers and farmworkers who had lost their jobs to the UC-Blackwelder harvester finally coalesced in the late 1970s. They brought a lawsuit in 1979 against the University of California charging that it failed to honor its mandate, under the 1887 Hatch Act, to serve the whole public interest by funding 'mechanization research projects [which] have harmed the interests of small family farmers, laborers, consumers and California's rural population' and 'favored large agricultural business' ( California Agrarian Action Project, Inc. v. Regents of the University of California 1989). The legal fight made national headlines, with prominent outlets such as The Los Angeles Times and The New York Times at long last bringing the politics of mechanization's technological frame into the belated spotlight with headlines such as 'Suit accuses university of misusing public money to benefit big farmers' [80] and 'Farm research aims disputed' [81]. However, by the time the lawsuit finally worked its way to a conclusion through the courts, it was 1989 and the mechanization fervor had long since quieted down. The California Court of Appeal found in favor of the University of California, dismissing the coalition's claims, but the real dispute had been won decades earlier in machine sheds, experimental stations, and board rooms with nary a farmworker in sight.

If we generalize the tomato case, we might expect widespread, relatively swift adoption of mechanized harvest and other 'labor saving' machines across specialty crops. However, we discovered that, even given the strong alignment of macro factors that seemingly favored the design and deployment of machines to replace workers, mechanization

<!-- image -->

rarely progressed as smoothly, inevitably, or naturally as it sometimes appears in retrospect.

## Comparison with other attempts to build mechanization momentum

We now compare three cases that span a continuum of mechanization momentum, from lock-in to technological frames that failed to coalesce. These include nuts (almonds and walnuts), for which machines rapidly pervaded orchards; peaches, for which machines encountered greater resistance, in contrast to plums for processing; and finally, lettuce, which to this day is frequently harvested with handheld knives. For each case, we illuminate the process of socially constructing machines by tracing the proximate contextual drivers for replacing workers with machines, the crop-specific drivers and brakes for mechanization, the pathdependencies that introduce unpredictability to these trajectories, and the stories people tell about problems, solutions, progress, and the future. We tell each case as a narrative unfolding over time, interweaving these elements to show how each mechanization trajectory emerged.

## Case 1: Nuts

Nut production has a long history in California, which was the leading producer nationally even in 1920 (Olmstead and Rhodes 2003). Nonetheless, between 1925 and 1965, the almond market remained small and stable, ranking only #19 in California by 1961 (well behind tomatoes, lettuce, and peaches). Walnut production, too, was relatively modest. Crucially, nuts were beginning to attract greater consumer interest in the 1950s, promising new markets. Over just 15-20 years, starting from 1948, nut orchards were swiftly mechanized, generating inspiration for other tree crops. While nut mechanization faced significant biological and orchard management resistances, these were gradually overcome through the remaking of orchards and farmers to be machine-compatible. Still, the specific technological frames embodied in 'successful' machines had to align with tree properties: there was a limit to how much orchards could be remade.

Like other tree crops, nut production required substantial labor. While nuts naturally drop from trees over several months, their harvest can be accelerated. Historically, workers walked along tree rows, knocked down bunches of nuts with poles or mallets, and raked nuts from the ground into sacks that were carried to waiting trucks [9]. Depending on the local climate and tree variety, they might repeat this process 2 to 4 times. In some orchards, nuts landed on canvas sheets mounted atop mule-drawn sleds. Compared to other tree crops, nut orchards were simpler to manage

throughout the year, as they did not require extensive pruning or removing excess nuts. Still, harvest time in California as of 1952 saw 16,000 workers laboring in walnut orchards, with another 9,000 retrieving almonds [10].

Mechanization initially encountered resistance from soils, tree structure, and orchard design. Machines could not operate effectively on uneven ground. They picked up dirt, twigs, and leaves, requiring frequent cleaning. Soils might be cloddy and wet, hiding fallen nuts. Tree branch structure hampered machine access; nuts tumbled into difficult-to-reach spots under trees. Nut trees varied greatly in their height, trunk circumference, and branching geometry. Whereas walnut trees are large (25-35 m for the Juglans Regia species, with trunks of up to 2 m in diameter), almond trees are only 4-10 m tall with trunks of 30 cm. These physical characteristics affected the shaking power and rhythm needed to loosen nuts. Trees were poorly spaced in many orchards, limiting space for machines to maneuver. Orchards commonly grew multiple varieties and nut types, all requiring slightly different technologies. Mechanization also made trees more vulnerable to diseases such as fungal infections because harvest machines might scar bark or break branches. Compared to tree fruits, however, nuts held crucial advantages. As durable seed kernels whose outer hulls and flesh are disposed during processing, they have a flexible harvest window and can be handled roughly with minimal damage [11].

Early experiments with nut mechanization began during WWII, when growers began designing mechanical 'shakers' to replace hand-held poles. By 1945, several hundred tractor-based shakers were in use in walnut orchards, achieving 'substantial savings in labor' [9]. This technology could readily be 'dropped in' as a substitute for hand-shaking [11]. However, the nuts still had to be picked up from the ground, a labor-intensive task.

In response, in 1946, researchers at Oregon State College in Corvallis invented a vacuum suction machine to scoop up filberts. Over the next few years, almond growers in California trialed this machine, which looked like the mythical hydra with 6 to 8 nozzle-tubes coming out of its maw (Fig. 2) [12]. It could harvest a 50-acre orchard in just 2 weeks with fewer workers. For farmers, the machine freed them from dependence on seasonal workers, and added another benefit in terms of a shorter, more controlled harvest season, which reduced the risk of losing the crop to low temperatures during early fall [9,13]. Farmers could now let the nuts more fully mature, obviating the need to dry them. 'So it would seem there are enough advantages to machine harvesting of almonds that the practice is here to stay even though there are a few problems such as dust to be solved before the machines are generally accepted' [12].

Inspired by concerns about postwar labor costs, dozens of almond growers highly skilled in mechanical engineering

This six-nozzle machine has one nozzle thaf swivels around trees. The operator sits out in front to steer and control the operations of the suction harvester

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Six-nozzle  suction  harvester  for  almonds,  said  to  'reduce costs.' Western  Fruit  Grower .  March  1948,  p.16.  Images  originally appeared in Western Fruit Grower ® magazine. Republished with permission of Meister Media Worldwide

built their own shaker designs between 1948 and 1953 [14,15]. Importantly, unlike in the tomato case, UC agricultural engineers and extension advisors played little part in creating these prototypes. The growers appeared to be mainly motivated by rising labor costs (harvesting accounted for 35-50% of production costs [13]) and labor market volatility (the 1954 walnut harvest foundered due to shortage of workers [16]). The Eisenhower Administration also intensified enforcement of immigration laws against 'illegal aliens' [17]. During this time, technological configurations took diverse forms that were gradually winnowed down to the most 'practicable' ones. Tractors pulled on steel cables tied around tree trunks; jeeps drove compressed air rams that hammered against trunks; engines imparted a shaking power to trunks and branches via booms. Some were beltdriven; others were belt-pulley-driven. Tractors might use wheels or treads. Those early machines were extended into walnut orchards, introducing new challenges to shake the larger, stronger trees. This illustrates the interpretive malleability that new technologies often manifest, as the designs of different inventors jostle against each other-and against biological and physical constraints.

The suction machine dissatisfied orchardists because it moved sluggishly, was seen as expensive, and could not manage dust and tree debris. They began to experiment with other types of pick-up machines that used different solutions to deal with the challenges of dust and twigs. Around 1950, A.D. Goodwin, a farmer-designer, introduced a pickup machine which used a rake mechanism-mimicking how farmworkers performed the task-to toss nuts from the ground onto a conveyor belt [18]. In 1952, the Food and

Chemical Corporation introduced a new design that could process 1 acre per hour; this machine removed larger sticks through a conveyor, blew out leaves with a powerful fan, permitted finer dirt and small stones to fall through slats, and a 'double squirrel cage' device extracted any remaining clods [19]. Every machine needed frequent repairs and maintenance because of the harsh orchard conditions they worked under.

At this point, mechanization was widely understood by growers, UC researchers, and industry staff to have inevitable momentum. In 1950, agricultural engineer Ralph Parks wrote, 'The person who believes further mechanization in agriculture will cease is a back number and might in his stupor be run over in his orchard by a tree shaker, a mechanical pick-up, or a speeding sprayer' [20]. Parks believed that machines had major benefits for workers: they would avoid drudgery, broaden their intellect, and do more reasoning for themselves. Parks was a major leader in the UC Davis agricultural mechanization group; his numerous talks and articles into the 1960s extolled the advantages of machines over workers. 'Quite a lot of work yet needs to be done on the machines-even more on the would-be owners of these machines' [20]. He added: 'A farmer with faith in mechanization overcomes obstacles that the faint of heart readily fails on.' This feeling of growing momentum, even inevitability, was amplified when equipment manufacturers quickly began taking over from growers in producing the new machines [21]. As the technological frame stabilized, manufacturers absorbed grower-designed technologies and made a new market out of these by 1953-thereby emerging as a central actor-group that propelled subsequent developments.

The transition to mechanized harvest occurred over a decade. In 1953, UC pomologist E.F. Serr surveyed orchard developments and found that mechanical shakers were steadily displacing hand-shaking [22]. These machines were far from perfect but 'most growers now find them indispensable'. As for pick-up machines, they were finding wider acceptance each year. The pneumatic shears and mobile hoists starting to appear in fruit orchards (see the next case) were being introduced to the nut industry. While many almond farms were already advanced, walnut orchards could potentially reduce labor needs by 50% by completely mechanizing their harvests at a time when tree yields had almost doubled from 1934. Further progress could be achieved by narrowing nut varieties to those that yield more, breeding trees for greater output, and improving the culture of trees through better pruning and nutrition.

Yet mechanization's arrival was not as inexorable as technologists like Parks and Serr expected. Some growers tried shaker machines and revived hand-shaking, since they 'were dissatisfied with broken tree limbs and damaged bark, the difficulty of getting a skilled shaking crew, and inability to

<!-- image -->

save in cost' [13]. Orchardists discovered that cable shakers readily damaged tree trunks and needed more workers to set the cable and to clean up trees. Boom shakers required fewer workers and caused little apparent visual damage [23]. Pneumatic shaking did not work effectively, particularly from hoist stands. Pick-up machines were used less frequently at this moment, despite the varied designs being introduced, because farmers resisted extra orchard modifications like leveling and cleaning the floors [13]. Catching frames and canvas sheets were also rarely used because they required substantial, skilled labor (at least 8 workers for the sheets), were difficult to move around trees, and could only be economically used for a once-through pass [13]. Instead, nuts were still mostly raked up by hand. As a result, California's mechanized nut harvest was uneven, clustered in a few northern counties [24].

UC extension researchers therefore studied the effectiveness of different combinations of shakers and pick-up machines. They also strove to educate growers about the orchard management practices needed to adopt to maximize mechanization gains. In a 1952 Western Fruit Grower article, Ralph Parks instructed orchardists on how to prepare the ground for machinery. 'There is more to organizing a mechanical operation than meets the eye at first glance' [10]. For a machine to work properly, the ground must be leveled; the trash and clods that collect around trunks must be spread; weeds and cover crops must be eliminated. Soil types diverged greatly between orchards and regions, with clay soils posing particularly intractable problems. Management practices necessarily had to be locally adaptable. This advice was repeated many times over the next decade in an effort to discipline growers into adapting to machines. Burt Burlingame wrote that orchardists must recognize 'the importance of a good ground preparation job and the need for planning ahead in order to accomplish it' [25, see also 26]. 'Substantial savings in time, labor, wear-and-tear on machinery, and costly break-downs are your pay-off'. In 1955, E.F. Serr recommended that young walnut trees should be 'trained' (shaped) to take a modified center leader form, initially like a pine-tree but then adding 4-5 primary branches further up. This would prevent the naturally occurring vase-like shape that impeded mechanical shaking [27].

Further technologies, such as the Schmeiser machine, were introduced to level and clear orchards. By 1965, progressive farmers 'needed' a suite of machines (landplane, boom shaker, mechanical sweeper, pick-up, trailer, truck, forklift). Nut farming demanded even more capital and debt as mechanization cascaded across the entire production process. Orchards changed dramatically in their topology, tree structure, and planting configuration. The number of nut varieties was simplified, to avoid perplexing machines, while adding a few new ones such as the Davey walnut that matured evenly across a tree [28]. Because costly machines

could only be economically justified by large production volumes, orchards in northern California began consolidating into larger properties [26]. In many ways, nut mechanization 'succeeded' because university-based engineers and later equipment manufacturers undertook to remake farmers into mechanization acolytes who would accept new norms of orchard management and believe that machines promised the future.

In 1962, Ralph Parks wrote proudly that a high proportion of walnut growers were using machines while around half of almond orchardists had adopted the boom-and-shaker model [23]. Profiling the 'new' nut industry, a journalist noted, 'Machinery has so completely taken over harvesting operations that the walnut is never touched by the hand' [29]. By around 1968, nut orchards were largely mechanized, and Western Fruit Grower no longer covered new developments. In subsequent decades, equipment manufacturers focused on refining technical details. Given this rapid mechanization of nut orchards, other tree crops could be expected to follow, and several did (like prunes and cherries for processing). But many did not.

## Case 2: Peaches

Postwar,  fruit  tree  crops  appeared  ready  for  dramatic advances in mechanization. California's fruit orchards were already heavily capitalized by 1945. The value of their equipment greatly exceeded the national average ($31,300 per farm to $18,900); within California, particularly in the north, orchards owned many more trucks, tractors, and motors compared to row crop farms [30]. Nonetheless, the pursuit of fruit tree mechanization proved more difficult than for nut trees. Peaches exemplify the many impediments that the fruit industry confronted. As of 1961, peaches ranked #14 in the state's agricultural output; fresh peaches were a stable and small but lucrative market while cling peaches constituted the biggest canned fruit market nationally. Despite 25 years of intense endeavor, peach orchards remained stubbornly resistant to mechanized harvesting. The production process did eventually become partially mechanized, primarily through mechanical aids for handwork. Stabilized technological frames ended up strongly reflecting fruit tree resistances.

As with nut orchards, nurturing and harvesting peaches was labor intensive. Traditionally, workers climbed ladders to handpick the fruit, transferring it from their bags into boxes that were then carried to waiting trucks. Between harvest seasons, growers needed a significant number of workers to prune and thin the trees from ladders. In 1943 alone, 100 million 'man' hours were dedicated to deciduous fruit tree production, with labor needs rising to 80-85% of production costs by 1947 [31]. Typically, 40,000-45,000 workers engaged in the peach harvest in California. Harvesting

deciduous fruit crops absorbed 42% of the state's yearly agricultural labor.

Peach orchards manifest many biological and cultural resistances. The fruit's quality deteriorates rapidly after harvesting, making smooth handling crucial to achieving a saleable product. When peaches collide with tree limbs, other fruits, or equipment, they bruise easily, accelerating deterioration and rendering the fruit less acceptable for both fresh and processed markets. Peach fruit ripens at different rates on a particular tree, let alone across an entire orchard, demanding at least two harvesting passes to attain a high proportion, undermining the economic efficiency of machines whose rationale depends on speeding up harvests. Fruit trees vary greatly in their ease of loosening: certain fruits, like olives and prunes, strongly attach to their limbs, calling for energetic-even violent-shaking force, which can injure bark, limbs, foliage, and the remaining fruit. The following season's harvest can be lost if nascent fruits are accidentally eliminated. Peach trees have a relatively high attachment threshold. Finally, because peach trees, like other fruit trees, produce up to four times as many fruits as they can mature, excess fruits must be removed ('thinned') to allow plant resources to flow to the remainder. This task requires particularly high (and non-mechanizable) worker skill and judgment to know which fruits to cut [31].

During WWII, growers benefited from high crop prices but the postwar years saw a dramatic decline in crop values while labor costs continued to increase. In the late 1940s, some growers experimented with pneumatic shears to prune peach trees. In 1948, UC pomology professor Warren Tufts wrote, 'As I see it, any mechanization which will reduce or eliminate the use of ladders offers the best opportunity for reduction in production costs' [31]. The geometry of peach and other wide-spreading trees made it impossible to prune from the ground. Growers tested long-handled shears that workers used while standing on ladders but found this unsatisfactory. This led to growers adept in machine fabrication designing the first platforms, built atop tractors, trucks, or wagons to allow workers to reach inside trees. They added hand-operated slipboards and catwalks to get workers close enough to use short shears for delicate, faster cuts. The platforms were also used for thinning and harvesting work. Western Fruit Grower observed: 'Many growers are interested in pneumatic pruning because it keeps the operator up out of the mud and makes the job somewhat easier and more attractive than the usual ladder wrestling' [32].

Soon, equipment manufacturers pushed aside growers and devised a multiplicity of designs for mobile hoists, platforms, and shears to assist workers to prune or pick fruit more quickly. Ads proliferated for equipment like Blackwelder's 'Steel Squirrel' (an elevated platform, Fig. 3) and King Manufacturing's shears. These mechanical aids support handwork, but they can result in substantially reducing

## Cut orchard labor costs in half

Fig. 3 Advertisement  for  Blackwelder  'Steel  Squirrel',  a  self-propelled elevating platform that promises to 'let one man out-work 2 to 3 with ladders.' Western Fruit Grower . June 1957, p.15. Images originally  appeared  in Western  Fruit  Grower ®  magazine.  Republished with permission of Meister Media Worldwide

<!-- image -->

## prune, pick, thin, wire with the

Lets one man out-work 2 to 3 with ladders

worker numbers by allowing many more trees to be processed per day. At a farm machinery conference in Davis, a  Blackwelder employee explained that the Tree squirrel boosted worker output in peach orchards by 40-135% [33]. A new cognitive culture of accelerating production began forming, motivated by perceptions of 'a pressure for increased production at the lowest unit cost' [30]. The sales manager of Selma Trailer Company opined: 'Progressive farmers are turning their orchards and vineyards into assembly line crop factories by using industry methods of material handling' [34]. Yet, as UC engineer Ralph Parks complained, even in a well-mechanized orchard, over 60% of work was still done by hand [18].

Mechanization efforts thus shifted to the harvest stage. Here, progressive fruit growers, UC agricultural engineers and extension researchers, and equipment manufacturers joined forces to conduct technical research and field trials. Fruit trees varied in height, trunk circumference, branch structure, and 'bushiness'. As a result, simply borrowing shakers and catchers from the nut industry was impossible: new designs were needed to accommodate specific tree crops, including peaches. At this time, the arrival of mechanization was seen as naturally inevitable. Growers experienced labor shortages, and also complained that workers were declining in skill and dedication. 'Western orchardists know that increasing mechanization of every possible operation is their only solution to their most difficult problemfarm labor' [21].

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 A Goodwin Picker used to collect fallen plums for processing into prunes, a $4,460 ($48,000 in 2021 dollars) machine estimated to cut harvesting costs (per ton) in half 'if ground preparation is good.' Western Fruit Grower .  June  1955,  p.18.  Images  originally  appeared in Western Fruit Grower ® magazine. Republished with permission of Meister Media Worldwide

<!-- image -->

Prune farmers were among the first to attempt mechanically shaking their trees and picking up the fallen fruit (Fig. 4). Being shaken loose, falling to the ground, and getting picked up leads to damaged plums, but processors tolerated bruises and tears because the damage was largely unnoticeable once dried into prunes. Like nuts, plums could undergo rough treatment from machines and keep their value. Farmers experimented with various shaking technologies and quickly learned that tractor shaking with steel cables caused severe tree damage and was too slow [35]. As in nuts, over time, plum growers gravitated towards boom shaking and catching frames. In general, fruit growers encountered orchard management issues like those of nut orchardists: soils needed to be smooth and flat, clods and rocks had to be removed, weeds and cover crops were regarded as undesirable. With prunes, twigs and leaves could be easily separated by floating the lot in water-filled casks and skimming off the fruit. Hence, prune harvests soon followed nuts in being largely mechanized.

Growers came to view pruning as critical for modernizing production. Pruning rejuvenated older trees, enabled fruit to grow larger with more space, and gave workers and shakers better access. [36]. Adopting mechanical harvesters necessitated the redesign of tree structures (such as providing enough trunk area for a shaker to grip), and thus the use of powered shears and lifts. Similarly, as a UCCE advisor noted, tree shaking advances created a need for mechanized fruit pick-up and thus orchard floor flattening [37]. This illustrates how initial mechanization can lead to a cascade of further mechanization steps, reshaping what trees and orchards physically look like.

A few peach growers also conducted experiments with the shake-catch method but found harvests challenging.

The California peach industry was over-producing at this time; output had risen from 8.4 tons per acre in 1940 to 12 tons in 1953, resulting in a major marketing problem. Industry figures argued that prices must drop to sell more, implying greater use of machines to reduce production cost. But, by the late 1950s, progress remained meager. Western Fruit Grower noted: 'To most people, this highlabor job looks like one of the toughest to mechanize and it has resisted whatever modest efforts have been made' [38]. Both the 1955 and 1956 Peach Days (an annual industry summit jointly held in Davis by UC and the California Peach Canner Association) omitted mechanized harvesting. Instead, planting more trees per acre, improved tree culture, and mechanized bulk handling were emphasized as ways to increase orchard output. 'Growers must continue to strive for high yields in order to keep our product prices moderately low' [39]. UCCE's recommendations on pruning practices did not align with what mechanized harvest would require.

In 1958, the agricultural mechanization research group at UC Davis, in partnership with USDA engineers based at Davis, decided to intervene by launching what came to be a series of investigations into shaker and catcher design/operation that endured until 1968. The following year, 1959, interested growers were invited to a Yuba City orchard to witness a new UC-built peach harvest prototype machine: two pneumatic impact shaker 'guns' that workers swiveled to aim at multiple branches, and that were attached to a heavily foam-padded catching frame which conveyed fruit into bins at the rear. The prototype could pick a tree in two minutes.

How did the growers react to the demonstration? Well, it's safe to say that there was a lot of enthusiasm, as evidenced by those growers who eagerly took turns manning the guns for themselves. But it was enthusiasm tempered by the realization that much work remains to be done before they will be using a similar machine in their own orchard. Nevertheless, there seemed to be unanimous agreement that this was a machine that was going to prove itself [40].

Yet this machine failed to ever match grower expectations for speed and capacity. Equipment manufacturers vigorously competed with adaptations of commercial machines, such as a 10-foot Goodwin boom shaker version for peaches (compared to 16' for almonds and prunes, 22' for walnuts). The UC team then shifted to studying how to refine these machines, which they eventually detailed in a 1966 report [41]. They were 'planning to pamper the peaches like no other crop they've ever harvested mechanically. They hope to show just how good-and gentle-mechanical harvesting can be. Most growers are convinced it will have to be a lot more gentle than what they've witnessed with other crops' [42].

Throughout the 1960s, extension engineers and industry officials repeatedly forecast that peaches would be mechanized within several years. Clearly, the UC group was a key promoter of the mechanization vision. They complained about laggard farmers who did not recognize the benefits of machines. Other key promoters were the California Peach Canning Association and Cling Peach Advisory Board. In 1963, they granted $8,500 to UC Davis to study whether mechanization was feasible, which machines were most suitable, and whether existing machines could be modified. 'Peach growers feel it's high time to get the facts on mechanical harvesting as it applies to clings… [they] want to know if the economics that some other crops have enjoyed in mechanization can be applied to clings. And they want to know what haven it offers in case of labor crisis' [42]. In truth, rather than growers demanding machines, it was more a case of industry leaders trying to conjure up a 'movement' for mechanization.

Yet trials of new technical designs repeatedly showed that handpicking outperformed machines when it came to quality and efficacy of peach harvesting. In 1961, yet another UC study found a once-through mechanized harvest captured only 60% of what hand-pickers could glean, with 10% more bruising [43]. This inconvenient discovery was excused by claiming the hand-pickers, knowing they were under study, took unusual care. (In many such accounts, hand-pickers are presumed to be unskilled and unintelligent.) Still, researchers acknowledged that selective picking posed a particularly complex barrier in peach orchards where fruits matured at radically different rates [44, 45]. Moreover, machine damage to fruit was quickly emerging as UCCE agricultural economists argued that fruit loss must be factored into calculations of productivity: if orchardists could obtain overall savings over hand-picking (primarily via speed and volume in a once-through pass), it did not matter whether plenty of fruit was left on the tree [46]. Despite many efforts by extension engineers and innovative growers to develop padding materials for catching frames and conveyor belts, or to adjust surface angles, machines could not catch up. Similarly, the work to make shaker clamps less damaging through padding and different directions of force only achieved modest improvements in protecting tree bark.

In 1961, an unforeseen peril materialized: prune orchards in the Sacramento Valley region began experiencing serious fungal canker infections, attributable to bark damage from shakers that could be hard to discern [47]. Over 70% of prune orchards eventually fell into this predicament. Several years later, the disease had spread to other tree crops, including peaches, leading to significant losses as the trees slowly sickened and died. Extension advisors and industry figures had shared the belief that they did not need to worry about bark damage. While in subsequent years, researchers were able to identify remedies such as pruning diseased parts and

applying chemical fungicides, the incident made fruit growers more skeptical towards mechanization.

By the mid-1960s, the R&amp;D emphasis had switched to peaches destined for canning. The prospect of mechanizing peach harvests for the fresh market was quietly relinquished. At this time, peaches constituted the largest canned fruit market worldwide, particularly for baby foods. In 1966, Western Fruit Grower reported, 'Cling peaches in California appear to be the next major crop that will submit to mechanical harvesting. Tests have been conducted for several years [by UC] comparing costs, speed, fruit condition, and tree training of mechanical harvesting to conventional hand harvest. They have been encouraging' [48]. However, peach processors were still not enthusiastic about accepting bruised fruit at high rates [49]. This meant peach growers did not make the same calculation that some other orchardists did, namely whether machine harvesting was fast and 'good enough' to economically justify fruit loss. Far from being the efficient production method that engineers and industry visionaries had hoped for, machines constituted a relatively inefficient approach if appraised in terms of food waste. Grower associations accordingly sought to persuade canners that they needed to relax their quality standards, with some success [50].

In 1967, the UC Davis group tested yet another harvesting machine that would cost over $25,000. That year, Western Fruit Grower editorialized that the only real breakthroughs in fruit mechanization had been for the processed, not fresh, market-where the flaws of machines could be more effectively disguised. In 1968, UC Davis researchers implied it was up to peach growers to adopt the newly feasible machines. Summarizing a now-familiar list of areas that growers could improve on, UCCE engineer Robert Fridley told the Peach Day audience, 'The university has learned what it wanted to know about mechanical harvesting of cling peaches' [51]. Pomologist L.L. Claypool reiterated the need for orchardists to prepare trees for mechanical harvest: limbs and foliage should be pruned to allow plenty of open space, while enough trunk area should be available for shaker hookups [51]. The declaration in 1963 that '[g]rowers will have to alter their trees or there will be little chance of machine harvesting successfully' remained valid [52]. Implicitly, the UC researchers blamed growers for not complying with the new management regime and refusing to use machines.

Western Fruit Grower and other industry commentators saw the plateauing of mechanization as largely due to economic factors-ignoring the many biological, physical, and farmer resistances at play [53]. 'The peach industry in California is throwing away millions by refusing to accept available equipment.' The belief was that if only these economics could be made to work, the progress of mechanization would resume. Following UC's retreat, the Cling Peach Advisory Board stepped in and reproduced much of the university's

<!-- image -->

work through its own studies. The board may have assumed that an industry actor would be more credible for reluctant farmers and canners-or perhaps it just could not abandon the mechanization dream. Yet it ended up repeating the same findings and the same recommendations [54]. Clearly, many growers were not 'listening' to their advice: unlike nut orchardists, they resisted being remade to accommodate machines.

Still,  industry  figures  still  held  high  optimism  that peaches would be mechanized. In 1969, Western Fruit Grower reported in its annual mechanization review that this could be a 'good machine year' because labor problems were surging again [55]. Union activist Cesar Chavez and his UFW were challenging growers, while the California state legislature was considering a farm worker protection law. Processors might finally decide they would endorse crops like peaches and apricots for mechanization. An employee of Del Monte, a major peach processor, wrote in 1970: 'We know that machines can harvest faster and more thoroughly than human hands. Obstacles exist but they are being removed with time' [56]. He forecast that a significant proportion of cling peaches would be machine harvested within five years-a statement that could have been out of 1961 or 1966. The reality was that only 7.35% of peaches were machine-reaped that year. Processors were losing substantial money on deliveries of mechanically harvested fruit because of damage or immaturity/over-maturity. Many smaller canners were exiting the market due to an ongoing glut of (mostly handpicked) peaches. Thus, an important segment of the fruit supply chain proved resistant, whereas some other fruits, notably prunes and grapes, found processors more welcoming.

By 1980, peach orchards had hardly evolved beyond the adoption of mechanical aids such as power pruning and mobile stands. That orchards growing peaches destined for processing still relied on human workers to perform all but these two specific tasks despite 20 years of effort underscores how the material nature of farms and crops can shape technological trajectories, rather than simply be shaped by technologies.

## Case 3: Lettuce

After World War II, new refrigeration technologies, a growing middle class, and the rise of supermarkets precipitated rapid increase in lettuce demand (Petrick 2006). Production increased to supply an 'infinitely wider' distribution network [57]. Lettuce first entered the top ten California specialty crops in 1957, and in 1964 jumped to second place, behind only tomatoes in acreage, production, and value [58]. California produced nearly 60% of the nation's lettuce, but the crop was very labor-intensive. Wages for harvest workers alone accounted for one-fifth of total lettuce production

costs. 'A typical lettuce harvest crew consists of 40 cutters and trimmers, a truck driver, a carton maker, two carton distributors, 20 packers, two washers, three carton closers and set-off men, two men windrowing cartons, and four supervisors' [59].

Comparable to processing tomatoes in market value, California lettuce seemed poised for mechanization. Indeed, we observed repeated calls in Western Grower and Shipper for new machines to eliminate the 'man with the hoe'. Yet the role of machines in lettuce agriculture hardly changed during our study period:

In the early 1950s the transition to vacuum cooling, carton packing (v. crate packing), and field packing (v. shed packing), constituted the last major technological development in lettuce harvest. Since then, a great many small-scale innovations have occurred, but the basic process has remained untouched (Friedland et al. 1981, p. 70).

Despite much effort and numerous promises to the contrary, a fully-mechanized lettuce harvest machine never materialized. 10

Lettuce farming proved a resistant biological and cultural system. Some resistance stemmed from the nature of the plant itself, which does not grow uniformly in space or time. Lettuce needed to be seeded heavily and then several weeks later thinned to the right density for optimum maturation. At harvest time, the edible lettuce leaves did not 'shake free' like tomatoes, nuts, or peaches. Instead, the heads had to be cut precisely just below the soil level and the inedible outer leaves trimmed before packing. Lettuce also damaged easily and rotted quickly; production had to move fast but carefully to get fresh, attractive heads to market.

Growing lettuce took many steps: preparing the field and beds, planting the seeds, irrigating, thinning unnecessary plants, weeding and pest control, and finally harvesting and packing. Each step required unique tasks, and the ways in which those tasks were performed at one stage affected work at all other stages. For example, the width or height of prepared beds affected the kinds of machines that could subsequently drive through a field and whether workers could reach the plants, while the rate of seeding and herbicide application impacted the amount of thinning and weeding that would be required later. This variability in tasks meant that farm workers needed both skill and adaptability. Thinning and weeding required experience and precision to quickly decide which plants to remove and which to keep. During harvest, workers had to select lettuce heads of the right firmness: not too crisp (or they would break), nor too

mature or damaged. Harvest crews typically conducted three to four cuts, or pass-throughs, over a period of days, each time selecting only the most optimal heads [60].

Faced with the complexity of lettuce work, the industry's goal of 'speeding up harvesting operations to keep apace with the highly-mechanized mass production methods in use in the packing sheds' initially took shape through small technological steps to simply enhance farm labor [61]. One notable innovation attached a long, motorized conveyor belt system to a tractor: the farmer still needed many workers to walk the rows, cutting and trimming lettuce on the ground, but those field workers could now feed the harvested lettuce up to a handful of packers riding on a central motorized platform. As these machines appeared on California farms, a 1949 article in the Los Angeles Times proclaimed, 'Supermechanization has come to the lettuce fields' [62]. Later in the 1950s, this platform was modified to allow packers to wrap heads with plastic for shipping nationwide. Thomas (1985) details how the platform had changed the organization of labor and worker behavior by the time of his early 1980s fieldwork. Whereas cutting teams traditionally enjoyed flexibility in moving through the fields, they now had to keep pace with the machine, the speed of which the foreman controlled, and operate at the wrappers' rate, which was often too slow. Significantly, and similar to the sorters on the tomato harvester, the packers were largely women and youth who could be paid much less because their labor was defined as 'women's work'.

Industry optimism was high that further advances in breeding and cultivation techniques would standardize lettuce, preparing the crop for fully-mechanized harvest. Ads for 'uniform seeds' became more common (Fig. 5). Pundits forecasted that eventually farmers would plant seeds so precisely that they would yield perfectly spaced beds of lettuce that all ripened at the same time, which would obviate the need for costly hand labor to thin and weed and also create ideal field conditions for machine harvest. In 1948, the outlook appeared rosy:

Mechanization of the lettuce industry has come a long way... And with such a quantity of brain-power continually seeking new methods, no one can forecast what the future will bring forth [63].

But mechanization technologies did not advance during the 1950s, even though tensions between lettuce growers and workers intensified. The lettuce industry's rapid growth and consolidation gave farm workers a unique point of leverage. Growers required 13 million hours of field labor per year [59]. Yet that labor was needed in different places at different times for short bursts of activity, all on a tight and inflexible schedule:

Fig. 5 'Never such a uniform field of lettuce' reads a seed company advertisement. Western Grower and Shipper . 1949. Reproduced with permission from Western Grower &amp; Shipper

<!-- image -->

If the Western lettuce business could be concentrated into a centralized factory and put on a factory schedule, the requirements for harvesting and packing would present no great problem. Unfortunately, the lettuce industry… cannot operate that way [59].

This situation left the industry vulnerable to worker shortages and especially to strikes. Lettuce growers were aware of their precarious perch atop the California vegetable world: '[They] are… in serious danger of losing their control over the farm labor work force,' warned Western Grower and Shipper in 1960 [64]. The following January, farm worker unions launched major strikes at lettuce farms in the Imperial Valley, one of the first sites at which organized farm labor began a campaign to, as the LA Times reported, 'cripple and then ruin… 'corporate agribusiness'-farming carried on as a modern, large, complex, mechanized operation' [65].

As conflict between growers and unions dragged on, the industry renewed calls to cut farm workers out of the equation entirely. 'Machines-not men-will provide the ultimate solution to this complex problem,' opined Western Grower and Shipper [66]. Articles on mechanizing lettuce became far more frequent during the 1960s in both industry and national media. More importantly, they shifted from earlier emphasis on labor-aiding innovation to outright labor replacement. 'Labor aid devices can be very helpful… But

<!-- image -->

labor replacement machinery holds the most promise for increasing efficiency' [67].

Despite growing pressure to mechanize lettuce, numerous hurdles quickly emerged, as Western Grower and Shipper reported in 1964:

Mechanization is further complicated by the fact that we are dealing with living plants which respond to variations in weather, treatment, and other factors in different ways-often without regard to the wishes of the growers, scientists, engineers, and technicians [68].

Engineers noted that 'true [harvest] mechanization would involve four steps': selection, cutting, trimming, and packing. Yet their best effort produced machines that struggled to perform just two tasks: select and cut lettuce. And even these were 'crude prototypes, subject to breakdowns and failures, restricted in their scope and speed… and completely unequipped to handle the subsequent steps of trimming and packing' [59]. In other words, even though engineers believed they could easily substitute 'inanimate energy sources and mechanical devices for the muscles and minds of men' [69], the machines could not handle the variability of real farm fields and real lettuce.

Moreover, as the chair of the University of Arizona's Department of Agricultural Engineering 11 had acknowledged in 1961, 'Successful mechanization of lettuce harvest may well start with breeding, stand establishment techniques and cultural practices… [it] will go beyond harvesting machine development' [70]. Harvest mechanization also required development and adoption of specialized machines for every step of lettuce cultivation, each of which had different 'needs' to which the plant, farm field, and farm operation must conform. The mechanization agenda thus began to sprawl beyond tinkering with isolated machine prototypes, signaling an unraveling of the nascent technological frame.

In the face of multiplying complications, the industry lamented that it was 'just now starting on things which should have been done 20 years ago' [71]. To catch up, they convened a special committee in 1964 to craft a mechanization agenda to 'break it down on a machine-by-machine and a chemical-by-chemical basis,' but their main problem remained a 'heartbreakingly long process of development.' Because a one-pass harvest machine would be most feasible to engineer, the committee called for a 'true precision planter' and a mechanical thinner to ensure perfect lettuce spacing and maturation at harvest time. Finding that existing chemicals 'do not measure up to the needs of

mechanization,' the committee also recommended development of new chemicals to control weeds and pests that stood in the way of uniformity [71].

No less important to this agenda was organizing an oftenfragmented network of mechanization and chemicalization stakeholders. The industry hired a coordinator to 'take charge of our research in mechanization… [and] coordinate research endeavors among agriculturalists, industry, and educational institutions, seeking to speed up mechanization' [71]. This coordinator was tasked with wrangling the equipment manufacturers to be 'interested in an industry which, at first glance, does not seem too large a market.' Engineers, manufacturers, and funders all saw Western row crops, including even the relative juggernaut lettuce, as niche opportunities for capital investment: 'for all their [vegetables and melons] importance to the Western economy, they do not attract the interest of the major manufacturing firms' [72]. The plan proved too unwieldy to materialize. In 1968, an industry figure admitted that, 'Large scale mechanization is still a thing of the shadowy future, and is not about to wipe out the fact that our state continues to rely on a great many hands to harvest its fruits and vegetables' [73].

The failure of this lettuce mechanization initiative culminated in 1970, when UFW staged a massive lettuce boycott that shut down the industry, as one union organizer recalled: 'This action was a major victory for the union because it was the first time in the history of Imperial Valley that we had completely paralyzed a company for a whole day' [74]. Similar stories of farm worker strikes (see also Friedland et al. 1981; Thomas 1985; Wells 1996), grower hopes for a mechanized 'solution', and promising machine prototypes that never materialized cycled throughout the remainder of our study period. In 1977, for example, USDA scientists working with UC Davis engineers announced a $60,000 machine (about $266,000 in 2021 dollars) they projected would replace one-third of lettuce workers and 'do a better job of selecting lettuce for harvest than is now being done by hand' [75]. UFW expressed its opposition, noting that 'mechanization can make more money for the growers' at the expense of workers. Once again, however, the machines failed and lettuce harvest throughout the 1980s continued to rely on the same conveyor-assisted manual labor system established in the 1940s. The system, moreover, was applied in quite a different way by large growers from how researchers and engineers had envisaged its use. Far from reducing labor requirements, the growers needed two platforms, thus doubling worker numbers to around 66-who were paid significantly less (Thomas 1985). Those growers, moreover, used the machine as a disciplining device: they individualized and demeaned work to redirect worker resistance toward competition with each other (through gender and citizenship tensions), frustration at the machine itself (violently slapping it like the tenant farmer in The Grapes

of Wrath desiring to shoot the tractor razing his foreclosed farm), or cursing foremen (Thomas 1985, p. 174-177).

While both worker and biophysical resistance were present in other cases of mechanization, we found a novel, possibly unique source of resistance to mechanized lettuce harvesters stemming from a competing technology: the unassuming short-handled hoe, or el cortito as workers called it. This low-tech, hand-held tool embodied the momentum of an entire cultural and political economic system of worker exploitation and grower power in California (Murray 1982; Jain 2006). The short-handled hoe thus acted as a reverse salient, 'out of phase,' as Hughes (1987, p. 73) puts it, with the wider mechanization trajectory envisioned for lettuce.

The short-handled hoe entered California in the late nineteenth century with Japanese immigrants who came from peasant farming backgrounds (Murray 1982; Jain 2006, p. 60-61). In the traditional intensive cultivation systems of Japan, it was one element in a suite of hand-tools, meant to be used from a kneeling or squatting position. The adoption of the short-handled hoe as an isolated cog in the increasingly Taylorized working conditions of factory-like industrial lettuce farms led to health problems. Farmworkers had to repeatedly bend at the waist, or 'stoop', while weeding long rows of lettuce with el cortito . In the race toward mass production workers had to wield the hoe for hours and days on end. The constant stooping caused severe repetitive stress injuries to their backs and joints.

It took nearly our entire study period for farmworker advocates to find redress for the bodily damage caused by the short-handled hoe and its socio-technical network of worker exploitation. In the early 1970s, the California Industrial Safety Board began hearings to consider whether the tool should be outlawed. When workers were allowed to testify regarding their experiences with the short-handled hoe, they described it 'variously as an instrument of torture, surveillance, indifference, and sheer pigheadedness' whereas growers thought of it as 'simply a tool of the job' (quoted in Jain 2006, p. 63). Growers favored el cortito because the tool allowed supervisors to surveil workers (Murray 1982). Tellingly, one grower admitted, 'if you take away the control that we have with the short-handled hoe, we … will have to mechanize' (quoted in Jain 2006, p. 71). In 1975, the Division of Industrial Safety issued an administrative order banning the hoe's use.

In a history closely aligned with farmer interests, the disappearance of the short-handled hoe is framed as a case of technological obsolescence, conveniently erasing the intense power struggles over this technology between workers and growers from the story:

In the 1960s the hand thinning of vegetables became prohibitively expensive and the cost of seed skyrocketed. The invention of the precision planter allowed

precise spacing of seed in the soil and a reduction in the amount of seed applied per acre, leading to significant cost reductions and lower thinning costs. A side effect was the elimination of the short handle hoe, since the plants were spaced wider apart and it was easier for the workers to thin to a single plant for the desired spacing (Anderson 2015, pp. 175-176).

One grower featured in a 1960 edition of Western Grower and Shipper reported that he began experimenting with precision planting for lettuce 'for one particular reason-to see if they could space the lettuce in the rows sufficiently well so that the thinning could be done with long-handled hoes instead of the usual short-handled hoe,' particularly due to the 'uncertainty of the labor supply, especially for 'stoop' field work' [76]. The article conveys heavily racialized views of farm work, stating 'it has been definitively proven that there have been just two classes of labor that can be depended upon to do a reasonably good job of thinning lettuce… Filipinos and Mexicans'. The implication is that, if the supply of foreign, non-white workers decreases, there will be no workers left who are willing to endure the exploitative conditions required to work with the short-handled hoe.

Yet it is clear that the impetus behind grower support for the hoe lay in maintaining racialized power over their farmworkers, which as a corollary meant that they had more vested interest in maintaining the existing owner-worker hierarchy than they did in eliminating workers through mechanization. 12 While the short-handled hoe was used primarily for thinning young lettuce plants after seeding, the necessity to mechanize all stages of cultivation and harvest for a mechanical harvester to work meant that during the height of pushes to mechanize lettuce in the mid-1960s, staunch grower adherence to keeping workers in the field at thinning time translated to grower adherence to keeping workers in the field for harvest, as well.

## Discussion: comparing mechanization trajectories

Technology boosters seemed to expect every mechanization trajectory to parallel the tomato case, leading to widespread, swift mechanization of the entire specialty crop sector in California. Yet, contrary to widespread and persistent techno-optimist projections, machine labor did not replace human hands in California agriculture on a large scale.

<!-- image -->

Broad-strokes predictions of wholly automated farms, we discovered, belied the path-dependent course of mechanization efforts, which proceeded unevenly in fits and startsand sometimes not at all. Below, using our extended SCOT approach, we compare our findings across the four cases to draw some conclusions relevant to automation today.

Our cases show how it takes intense, sustained effort, investment, and consensus of purpose for a given machine to gain traction in its intended farming system, and even then, a functional machine may never materialize. Further, the contrast among the four cases reveals that mechanization is actually a spectrum of degrees by which machines supplant humans in the performance of cultivation and harvest tasks-an observation generally not explored in the agricultural social science literature. At one end are mechanical aids that enhance handwork, such as powered shears and picking platforms. Worker-driven machines that carry out essential agricultural tasks are in the middle, like nut shakers and pick-up systems. At the other end are robots that operate near-autonomously with minimal human input, as with modern prototypes of self-driving harvesters that pick strawberries. Moving along the spectrum becomes more and more difficult for the reasons we outline below.

At this point, it is helpful to recap the contours of this spectrum as revealed through our case descriptions. To do so, we summarize and tabulate four crop-specific factors beyond the social relations between growers and workers that strongly influence the extent to which and forms whereby a given crop becomes mechanized for each case. These are the biology or morphology of the crop plant, the type of cropping system, the market value of the crop, and the malleability of the supply chain to accept machineharvested crops (Table 1). In general, machines more fully replaced human workers in harvesting crops destined for stable durable goods markets, such as canning or dried fruit (though not always). These supply chains could tolerate aesthetic damage and varietal uniformity because processing provided a further value-added and differentiating step. Farming systems for easily damaged fresh-market crops with niche or volatile markets tended to maintain human workers for most harvest tasks.

However, this simple typology does not capture the many ways in which crops, agroecosystems, and behaviors of farmers and farm workers may warp, deflect, or resist the projected trajectory of harvest machines. We observed researchers and extension staff, equipment makers, and farmers respond to these frictions by experimenting with technical machine design tweaks, such as padding catcher frames for fruit, abandoning cable shakers in favor of boom shakers, and adjusting shaking cadences to better match fruit attachment strengths. In other words, initial technological frames frequently changed to suit crop characteristics as technologists perceived that problems existed in the field.

Table 1 Comparison of crop-specific factors beyond grower-labor relations that affect harvest mechanization trajectoryTable 2 Comparison of (1) resistances to harvest mechanization and (2) redesigns

| Crop    | Crop morphology                                                                                           | Cropping system    | Market value                                            | Supply chain                                                         |
|---------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Tomato  | Easily damaged, round, hard to break  off vine                                                            | Annual rows        | Low value, staple commodity, stable  market             | High (canned good, durable market)                                   |
| Nuts    | Hard, small, not easily damaged,  naturally breaks from branch if  shaken loose                           | Perennial orchards | Medium value, growing volume,  stable market            | High (dried good, durable market)                                    |
| Peaches | Easily damaged, soft and heavy, not  uniformly ripening-need selective  harvesting                        | Perennial orchards | High value, increasing volume, semi- stable market      | Low-medium (split between raw  fruit, fresh market and canned  good) |
| Lettuce | Low to ground and dirt, not uni- formly maturing, multiple varieties,  easily damaged/wilted, must be cut | Annual rows        | Medium-low value, emerging com- modity, volatile market | Low (raw vegetable, fresh market)                                    |

| Crop            | Sources of friction with original  farming system                                                                                                                                                                                   | Technology redesign                                                                                                                                                                            | Farm redesign                                                                                                         | Crop redesign                                                                                         |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Tomato          | Small fields Planted as surplus crop to diver- sify farm production Muddy conditions Difficult to extract whole fruit                                                                                                               | Design a machine that can  'gently' shake and separate  fruit from vine Allow space for human sorters  on machine                                                                              | Bigger farms Specialization in tomatoes                                                                               | Square, tough tomato Stalks break easily from vine Ripen more uniformly                               |
| Nuts            | from vine Small farms Uneven/dirty ground Tree trunks easily damaged,  high risk of tree disease Hard to physically shake trees                                                                                                     | Boom shaker Pick-up machines Bagging machines Raised pruning stands for  workers                                                                                                               | Leveling ground, removing  weeds, drying surface, plant- ing trees in straight rows Bigger farms                      | Trimming/pruning Growing one variety per orchard                                                      |
| Peaches Lettuce | Multiple nut varieties Small farms Uneven ground High risk of tree disease Need to thin out fruits Diverse tree geometry Hard to loosen fruit High rate of fruit damage due to  tree structure Uneven fields Bed sizes not standard | Boom shaker designed for  peaches with padded clamps Padded catching frames Raised pruning and hand-pick- ing stands for workers Chemical loosening Mechanize bed formation Precision planting | Leveling ground, removing  weeds, planting trees in  straight rows Bigger farms Leveling ground Standardize bed sizes | Trimming/pruning Thinning to eliminate excess  fruit Advances in precision planting Otherwise limited |

But researchers and extension staff, equipment makers, and industry associations also attempted to mold farms, crops, and farmers to be more amenable to the kind of mechanized harvest they envisioned (Table 2). They tried to transcend the many resistances that emerged during the course of mechanization. Perhaps the most commonly cited stemmed from b iological characteristics of the crop that caused machine prototypes to fail. Machines struggled to

reach fruit in orchards with tall trees or dense branches, select only ripe crops, gather most of the crop (instead of leaving it on the plant), and detach edible portions without damaging the harvested product beyond marketability. In each case, these difficulties resulted in food waste, threatening to contradict the very premise of mechanization: higher efficiency. Breeders and farm advisors thus turned to trying to change the plants themselves, for example breeding a

tomato to cleanly detach from the vine or instructing farmers to prune trees to be more open, two-dimensional, and short. However, breeding machine-friendly plant varieties took considerable time and effort (and could fail outright), while it could take decades before orchardists would plant new trees, and farmers might not wish to change their familiar management practices.

Whereas machines will only 'work' under a narrow range of conditions, farmers operate in variable geographies and environments , e.g., hilly or flat, rainy or dry, large fields or small, sandy or clay soils, uneven ground. While technologists repeatedly attempted to build more flexible machines that could better handle these different conditions, their efforts generally met with limited success. Mechanization boosters instead frequently worked to remake farmers into machine handmaidens willing to dramatically alter their cultivation practices to make fields and orchards more clean, smooth, and uniform. For orchards, this meant changing the lay-out of tree rows to become more accessible to machines, while for lettuce this meant changing the width of beds, the density of plants, and adopting earth-shaping machinery to level fields. In other words, both field and orchard management changed to minimize variability. Yet growers varied greatly in their willingness, capacity, and resources, and it took intense work to persuade them to adopt machinefriendly features, especially if they became skeptical about the promise of mechanization.

As a result of all these biological and environmental frictions, the technological frames of 'successful' mechanization were not simply embodied in machines but also spread into crops, farm lay-outs, and farmer behavior. In general, mechanization proponents often found it easier to aim to redesign farms and plants than to redesign machines. Despite engineers' vigorous efforts, machines could not reliably mimic all the skills, experience, and intelligence of human workers. In most cases, machine designers found they had to break up harvest labor that farm workers performed as a coherent whole into discrete tasks (e.g., separating, selecting, conveying, binning), each requiring a separate machine or continued, and now more monotonous, manual labor.

Crucially, the pathway that a mechanization trajectory followed reflected the competing assumptions and agendas of the actor groups involved. For example, UC engineers and extension advisors wanted to solve a practical puzzle-how to get machines to mimic the tasks that humans can perform in cultivation and harvest. They belonged to an epistemic culture that assumed agriculture needed to be further 'modernized' through labor-saving new technologies, even if farmers held no interest in replacing human labor with machines. Manufacturers and banks had a shared interest in selling new, expensive machines to farmers, or providing the loans to do so. Buyers (processors, packers, retailers, and their industry associations) wanted a steady, uniform,

<!-- image -->

and cheap supply of fruits, nuts and vegetables. In some cases, specific industry associations (e.g., peaches) hoped to expand markets through reducing food prices. Growers, and often their associations (e.g., in lettuce), wanted to keep operating costs at a minimum and maintain hierarchical control over labor to prevent resistance (strikes, unionizing, and cooperation among workers). While those actor groups all shared an interest in mechanization, their priorities often did not coincide, and might diverge greatly in the end.

A politics of expertise additionally complicated relations between university/equipment company engineers and practitioners. Each new prototype machine required field testing in 'real' conditions, but farmers were rarely the ones developing machines (outside of the exceptional case of nuts, and even then only early on), let alone farm workers. This resulted in a gap between machine design and use (and impacts): most engineers working on machine prototypes lacked the practical knowledge and experience of practitioners who worked directly with crops in the field. Because they held little respect for farmers' experiential expertise, and denied the existence of farmworker knowledge altogether, engineers frequently had to attempt to learn, from scratch, how farms for a specific specialty crop actually operated. This delayed machine development, resulted in designs that dissatisfied growers, and at times damaged their 'expert' credibility.

Due to the extended and risky timeframe for iteratively developing a functional prototype-the tomato harvester took 15 years-mechanization depended heavily on sustained external institutional and financial support . However, the primary institutions with the resources and stability to provide long-term support-land-grant universities and national manufacturers-often declined to invest in new machines for 'niche' crops. Manufacturers needed to see a large enough potential customer base to cover the high upfront cost to design, test, and manufacture a mechanical harvester at scale, and university researchers needed to experience enough lobbying power to breach the 'ivory tower' and push the R&amp;D agenda toward mechanization for a particular crop. Moreover, the University of California was forced to pull back its mechanization efforts after the 1979 tomato harvester lawsuit introduced a new reputational risk for this public institution-it could no longer afford to appear so directly partisan in its research pursuits. Thus, while economically important at a local scale, few California specialty crop sectors could muster enough demand or justification for labor-replacing machines to surpass these thresholds at that broader scale.

The demand for mechanization among farmers also proved mercurial. Many farmers needed to take out loans to purchase new machines, but did not necessarily have access to sufficient finance or deemed the investment too risky. Indeed, mechanization efforts sometimes suffered

'unforeseen' crises, as in the case of fatal canker infections in fruit trees caused by bark damage from shakers. Economic barriers were mediated by land tenure and farm size, since generally only farms of sufficient acreage could reap the full efficiencies-of-scale achievable with machines (and necessitated by their price). Moreover, the highly volatile relationship between farmers and farm workers continuously affected farmer demands for machines in complex ways depending on the state of union organizing, national immigrant labor policy, differences in farmworker wages among crops or regions, and regulations intended to protect farmworker health and safety. In other words, a mechanization trajectory entailed a process of negotiating whether and under what conditions growers might adopt a proposed machine-not simply the process of developing the technology.

Importantly, mechanization pathways also encountered the significant effects of technological momentum in the unmechanized cropping systems that technologists sought to displace. This momentum comprised both physical lockin-i.e. 'sunk costs' both of living organisms (e.g. perennial orchards vs. annual row vegetables) and infrastructure (e.g. packing sheds or established field boundaries)-as well as cultural lock-in-i.e. the tacit knowledge of farmers and farm workers adapted to farming in a particular way suitable for a particular set of technologies. As Gass and Biggs (1993) note in a review of rural mechanization, 'Once an approach is in place and accepted (for whatever reasons) within an institution or a series of institutions, it becomes hard to dislodge, even when its limitations have been exposed,' as was most starkly illustrated among our cases in the effect of the short-handled hoe on lettuce mechanization. We suggest that the extent to which a new harvest machine resists or reinforces existing norms, behavioral patterns, racial stereotypes, or other social relationships plays a major role in whether and how it gains traction in practice.

However, once machines were adopted in a specific crop industry, they instigated new technological momentum that in turn proved very difficult to shift despite emergent problems. For example, rough machine handling frequently led to significant food waste during harvest or transportation, leading farmers to overproduce to compensate-ironically causing reduced efficiency under mechanization. Additionally, since the 1950s, nut farming has become closely associated with mechanical harvesting that contributes to dust pollution problems (see, e.g., Hearden 2016; Erwin 2019), discourages cover cropping between tree rows (Ory and Iles 2021), and encourages the rapid growth of vast orchards with high water demands in a region prone to drought. Orchard and nut varietal diversity has also declined greatly.

Finally, examining the cases tells us much about the role of perceptions of the value and contributions of human labor among technology boosters. Dominant accounts of

mechanization, such as in industry magazines, constantly portrayed workers as a costly, unreliable, rebellious input into farming that farmers wish they could dispense with. Farmers, engineers, and industry pundits treated workers as interchangeable labor units with low intelligence, poor motivation, and weak skills. The history of mechanization is permeated with racialized labor hierarchies, leading to situations in which machines are literally valued more than human workers. Moreover, workers' contributions to keeping farms productive, and to keeping farmers wealthy enough to consider buying expensive machines, are almost never acknowledged. We see glimpses of the skills and knowledge that workers employ (e.g. picking fruit selectively; thinning weak lettuce plants; looking after cover crops in orchards to keep soils healthy), but these highly-tuned proficiencies are routinely deprecated as insignificant.

In addition, farmers and their industry associations lament continuously rising production costs and depict workers as the primary reason for their lack of competitiveness. This discourse justifies much of the work in the 1950s and 1960s to make mechanization feasible. But the argument that labor costs are unsustainable is never questioned, even though, decades later, California's farmers still employ hundreds of thousands of workers (Martin et al. 2017) and remain in business. Oddly, the rapid consolidation of farms into larger, fewer units is largely missing from the accounts of mechanization in UC extension reports and industry trade magazines-even though this trend poses perhaps the primary barrier to sustainable innovation in this sector (Carlisle and Montenegro de Wit et al. 2019a; Carlisle and Montenegro de Wit et al. 2019b).

While we cannot explore here the 'stickiness' of a vision of inevitable agrarian mechanization across a number of decades, despite continuous resistance and frequent failure to live up to techno-optimist predictions, we suggest that an important reason is that mechanization frames an alluring 'humans vs. nature' narrative. In common with other components of industrial agriculture (see Guthman 2004; Henke 2008), mechanization has promised control over an unruly and dynamic ecological and biological reality to intensify production. Peaches will submit to the shaker's force. Obstinate plants will be subdued by pruning, training, and breeding. Humans will conquer nature, however much effort it ultimately takes. Yet, that triumphant narrative arc masks a 'humans vs. other humans' struggle that we illuminate through our attention to frictions and power imbalances within the sociotechnical networks from which labor-replacing machines sought to emerge. Following mechanization trajectories reveals how farmers, extension staff, UC engineers, and industry have all sought to wield machines to impose their own priorities and values on agroecosystems and workers alike. The point is neither to valorize nor demonize machines, but to call attention to the

ways in which the interests of particular social groups are inscribed into technological frames for mechanization long before machines ever appear in farm fields.

## Conclusion

Tracing mechanization trajectories for multiple specialty crops in California during its mid-twentieth century R&amp;D boom confirms several broad insights from the agricultural social science literature. Crop characteristics do influence the feasibility of mechanization; capital can struggle to overcome the biological and physical resistances of farms. Yet we show that mechanization was not merely an external driver of change in labor and capital relations on farms. To understand how mechanization proceeded (or not) on farms, we combine extended SCOT and agricultural political economy lenses in a novel way, and compare four crops representing distinct farming systems. We thereby open the 'black-box' of mechanization to show its path-dependent nature-and expose the array of actor groups whose competing agendas and assumptions help decide which crops can be mechanized, to what degree, and in what forms. This approach allows us to reveal precisely how, when, and through what mechanisms these actor groups negotiate and seek to settle technological frames, and who is excluded from this process. These frames in turn explain how technological momentum builds and at times achieves a state of lock-in that in retrospect may appear inevitable. A key finding is that mechanization proponents sometimes found it easier to aim to redesign farms and plants than to redesign machines to adjust to highly variable farm conditions. This suggests that, to work more effectively, machines must be given priority over agroecosystems, farmers, and workers. This kind of analysis can be done for agrarian mechanization-and technological 'innovation' more broadly-in many different places and times.

Famous farmworker organizer Cesar Chavez said, 'Our position is that mechanization should benefit everyone, not just growers' [82]. Yet then, as now, the distribution of risks and benefits in technological 'advances' in agrifood systems is negotiated, if not decided, far upstream of the point at which those technologies manifest with tangible impacts on farms, workers, publics, and environments. Looking at contemporary issues in agricultural research and development, we suggest that key aspects of the technological frames evident in our historical study remain locked-in today. Technologists then and now predict that technological innovation will reduce labor costs and needs while producing more and cheaper food, all while sidestepping questions of social conflict and inequality.

That said, our work also reveals the contingency, even fragility, of these frames. Despite extensive, well-funded, and

<!-- image -->

long-term pressure to mechanize, specialty crops and agroecosystems can and do resist. As living organisms, crops do not have to cooperate with human ambitions; likewise, the dynamic landscape of farms may resist, causing machines to bog down in mud or clog with dust. Our expanded SCOT analysis clearly demonstrates that mechanization follows a non-linear and complex path that defies ready prediction, but also offers underappreciated leverage points. We believe there is value in showing that technologies might have taken different forms, with different consequences not just for crops and agroecosystems, but also for workers and rural communities. Re-opening these black boxes and 'unbracketing' the dimensions and political economic 'side effects' that technologists have preferred to ignore is the first step toward democratizing technoscience in agrifood systems. Thus, we recommend, as an initial step, that evaluations of agricultural technology-whether historical, contemporary, or anticipatory-should encompass the full, interconnected system of political, ecological, managerial, and market relations within which such technologies emerge, operate and intervene.

Our analysis also yields several reflections on contemporary efforts to automate agriculture around the world. We expect, for example, that crops will continue to vary greatly in how amenable they are to robot harvesting and automated systems; different actor groups will wrestle over the agendas, priorities, and assumptions being translated into technological frames-and those being left out. Already, we see multiple strawberry and lettuce harvesters in development in North America, Europe, and Asia, all somewhat different and competing for farmer use. Although these technologies purport to use artificial intelligence, imaging systems, GPS, and robotic arms to replace human labor and to manage substantial field variability, machines cannot think for humans. The machines in our cases never perfectly replaced human work, and often led to degradation in quality, effectiveness, and efficiency of cultivation and harvest that caused a variety of new agronomic, environmental, and supply chain problems. Human workers have intelligence, physical dexterity, and experiential know-how that engineers have long tried to replicate. As these efforts extend further into the cognitive labor of agriculture, there is every likelihood that human workers will face further disparagement as rhetorical cover for the technical shortcomings of machines chosen to represent 'the future'. To function, fully automated machines will require even more uniformity and simplicity in their work environment. Proponents of the 'self-farming farm' will try to mold crops, agroecosystems, farmers, and farmworkers to suit the machines' requirements, not the other way around. As climate impacts and other environmental changes create new streams of migration within and between countries, migrant farm workers worldwide will face further rounds of attempted displacement by machines, under conditions even more precarious than in the US. The age of robot farmers is

likely to be much more difficult and damaging to realize in practice than technology boosters believe.

Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge undergraduate research assistants Ayla Peters and Brenly Stapley, without whose dedicated hours digitizing print records in the University of California library archives this work would not be possible. We would also like to acknowledge the four anonymous reviewers whose comments and suggestions helped us strengthen the article.

## Primary documents

- 1. Moore, C. B. 1952. 'Mechanization Vital.' Western Grower and Shipper , 6 (June).
- 2. Anonymous. 1962a. 'The Vegetable Industry, 2000 A.D.' Western Grower and Shipper , 16 (March).
- 3. Saunders, S. J. 1956. 'Pre-packaging leafy vegetables.' Western Fruit Grower , 54 (May).
- 4. Anonymous. 1952a. 'Mechanization to prepackaging: Produce industry goes through two revolutions in 18 years.' Western Grower and Shipper , 24-25 (October).
- 5. Coman, E. S. 1951. 'Farm Labor, Domestic and Foreign.' Western Grower and Shipper , 19 (January).
- 6. Anonymous. 1963a. 'An Iron Bracero and a Chemical Hoe.' Western Grower and Shipper , 13, 73 (November).
- 7. 'The Bracero, Man in the Middle Again'. (1962). Western Grower and Shipper .
- 8. Fisher, W.D. 1947. Canning Tomatoes: Situation in California . Berkeley California: University of California Agricultural Experiment Station.
- 9. Batchelor, L. D., O.L, Braucher, and Serr, E. F. (1945). Walnut Production in California . University of California Agriculture Experiment Station.
- 10. Parls, R. R. (1952). 'Progress in Mechanizing Harvest Operations.' Western Fruit Grower , 13-14 (November).
- 11. Gerrans, L. (1966). 'The Machines Are Here - Why Wait?' Western Fruit Grower .
- 12. Parks, R. R., &amp; Fairbanks, J. P. (1948). 'Suction Machines Reduce Costs.' Western Fruit Grower , 14-16 (March).
- 13. Burlingame, B. B. (1953a). Walnut Harvesting . University of California Agricultural Experiment Station.
- 14. Anonymous. 'Saves the Work of 100 Men…' (1949a). Western Fruit Grower , 16 ( January).
- 15. Anonymous. (1949b). 'New Walnut Shaker Has 8 Acre Daily Coverage.' Western Fruit Grower , 16.
- 16. Anonymous. (1954). 'Labor Lack Endangers Walnut Crop: Tons Mildew on Ground as More Pickers Sought.' Los Angeles Times , 23 (October 19).
- 17.  Anonymous. 'Illegal Alien Labor Shows Marked Drop: San Joaquin Valley Farms Found Nearly Free of Wetbacks.' (1955a, November 21). Los Angeles Times .
- 18. Parks, R. R. 1950a. 'Nut pick-up gets a going over.' Western Fruit Grower , 7 (February).
- 19. Anonymous. 1952b. 'A Self-Propelled Nut Harvester.' Western Fruit Grower , 32 (April).
- 20. Parks, R. R. 1950b. 'Short-cut to profit.' Western Fruit Grower , 13-14 (August).
- 21. Couchman, R. 1952. 'Machines replace costly labor.' Western Fruit Grower , 7-10 (July).
- 22. Serr, E. F. 1952. 'Current Cultural Problems of the Walnut Industry.' Western Fruit Grower , 24.
- 23. Parks, R. R. 1962. 'Mechanization in Nut Crops.' Western Fruit Grower , 19 (June).

- 24. Anonymous. 1963b. 'There's A Whole Lot of Shaking Going On.' Western Fruit Grower , 14 (June).
- 25. Burlingame, B. B. 1953b. 'Ground Preparation for Mechanical Harvesting.' Western Fruit Grower , 20-21 (June).
- 26. Vocomil, J. A. 1957. 'Ground Preparation.' Western Fruit Grower , 24-25 (June).
- 27. Anonymous. 1953. 'Orchard Practices Evaluated.' Western Fruit Grower , 35 (February).
- 28. Coppock, R. 1955. 'New Ideas in Almond Growing.' Western Fruit Grower , 23 (September).
- 29. Anonymous. 1960a. 'Method of Harvesting Nuts Changes Radically: Former Tedious Means Give Way to Mechanization.' Los Angeles Times , 10 (November 6).
- 30. Wienand, E. B. 1952. 'Larger orchards, more machines: Growers Adopt Improved Cultural Practices, Turn Increasingly To Mechanization.' Western Fruit Grower , 7-8 (August).
- 31. Tufts, W. 1948. 'Farm mechanization problems.' Western Fruit Grower , 15-17 (May).
- 32. Serr, E. F. 1948. 'Pneumatic pruning equipment.' Western Fruit Grower , 5-6 (August).
- 33. Anonymous. 1955b. 'Fruit Engineering Research.' Western Fruit Grower , 39 (March).
- 34. Ruegg, C. 1950. 'Trailers save manpower, speed work, cut costs.' Western Fruit Grower , 11-12 (March).
- 35. Parks, R. 1952. 'With proper land preparation, fruit and nut growers can save tremendous amounts of money with Mechanical harvesters.' Western Fruit Grower , 31-32 (January).
- 36. Anonymous. 'Mechanical Pruning. Growers Get Many Benefits From New Pruning Devices.' 1958a. Western Fruit Grower , 30 (December).
- 37. Adrian, P. A., &amp; Fridley, R. B. 1959. 'New Catching Frame.' Western Fruit Grower , 29-30 (June).
- 38. Rogers, H. 1956. 'Pick Peaches by Machine. Here's a Grower Who Says It Can Be Done.' Western Fruit Grower , 26-27 (September).
- 39. Anonymous. 1955c. 'Cling Peach Growers Discuss Market Expansion.' Western Fruit Grower , 38-40 (April).
- 40. Anonymous. 1960b. 'Peach Knocking - Where We Stand.' Western Fruit Grower , 13-14 (October).
- 41. Fridley, R. B., &amp; Adrian, P. A. 1966. Mechanical Harvesting for Deciduous Tree Fruits .  University of California Agricultural Experimental Station.
- 42. Anonymous. 1963c. 'Harvesting Program Set Up By Peach Industry.' Western Fruit Grower , 19-20 (June).
- 43.  Anonymous.  1961a.  'Peach  Mechanization.' Western  Fruit Grower , 39 (April).
- 44. Anonymous. 1961b. 'Mechanical Harvesting limitations.' Western Fruit Grower , 42-44 (July).
- 45. Claypool, L. L. 1962. 'Mechanical Harvesting: The Horticultural Point of View.' Western Fruit Grower , 13-15 (June).
- 46. Fridley, R. W., &amp; Adrian, P. A. 1961. 'Mechanical Harvesting Costs.' Western Fruit Grower , 18-20 (June).
- 47. Dahling, R. 1962. 'Prune Day at UC Davis.' Western Fruit Grower , 27-38 (March).
- 48. Anonymous. 1966. 'Mechanical Harvesting 1966: gains are less spectacular but steady.' Western Fruit Grower , 13 (June).
- 49. Anonymous. 1967. 'Mechanical Harvesting Roundup.' Western Fruit Grower , 11-18 (June).
- 50. McRitchie, S. 1970. 'Canners and growers developing a uniform attitude about machine harvest of clings.' Western Fruit Grower , 14-15 (January).
- 51. Curlee, D. 1968. 'No matter how you spell mechanical harvesting, it comes out labor.' Western Fruit Grower , 7-8 (May).
- 52. Anonymous.1963. 'Cost Is A Dominant Factor.' Western Fruit Grower , 20-21 (April).
- 53. Anonymous. 1963d. 'Mechanical Outlook.' Western Fruit Grower , 15 (June).

<!-- image -->

- 54. Anonymous. 1968. 'Observe caution and shake well.' Western Fruit Grower , 17-18 (February).
- 55.  Curlee,  D.  1969.  'Circumstances  could  make  1969  a  good machine year.' Western Fruit Grower , 5 (March).
- 56. Haws, C. 1970. 'Coming of age', is Canner View of Mechanical Harvesting.' Western Fruit Grower , 16-17 (January).
- 57. Anonymous. 'King Lettuce.' (1948). Western Fruit Grower , 12-13.
- 58. Thor, E. 1965. Leafy Green Vegetables Production and Market Information. No. 65-2 (p. 62). University of California Agricultural Experiment Station and Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics.
- 59. Anonymous. 1964a. 'Labor for Lettuce.' Western Fruit Grower , 13-15, 25-26 (March).
- 60. Knott, J. E., &amp; Tavernetti, A. A. 1944. Production of head lettuce in California (No. Circular 128). California Agricultural Extension Service. Retrieved from http://  hdl.  handle.  net/  2027/ uc2.  ark:/  13960/  t3xs6  q71h
- 61. Anonymous. 1946. 'Confronted with the necessity of speeding up harvesting…' Western Grower and Shipper .
- 62. Anonymous. 1949c. 'Lettuce crop now crated in fields.' Los Angeles Times , 23 (December 4).
- 63. Anonymous. 1948. 'The Basket… Its place in lettuce harvesting.' Western Grower and Shipper (June).
- 64. Frederick, R. M. 1960. 'Small vegetable growers in life, death struggle.' Western Grower and Shipper , 34 (July).
- 65. Kennedy, H. 1961. 'Lettuce farm strike part of deliberate union plan.' Los Angeles Times , p. B1 (January 23).
- 66. Anonymous. 1963e. 'The Other Alternative.' Western Grower and Shipper , 1 (August).
- 67. Anonymous. 1964b. 'Where we stand on machine development.' Western Grower and Shipper , 14-15 (December).
- 68. Houseberg, J. 1964. 'Mechanization moves ahead.' Western Grower and Shipper , 71-72 (November).
- 69. Anonymous. 1962b 'Moving toward mechanization.'. Western Grower and Shipper , 16-17 (December).
- 70. Anonymous. 1961c. 'Mechanical harvesting: Progress report.' Western Grower and Shipper , 14.
- 71. Anonymous. 1964c. 'Vegetable mechanization: Two problems and a thousand solutions.' Western Grower and Shipper , 25-28 (April).
- 72. Anonymous. 1964d. 'A different view on mechanization.' Western Grower and Shipper , 27-29 (August).
- 73. Richardson, T. 1968. 'Farm labor: The domestic force.' Western Grower and Shipper , 14 (January).
- 74. Figueroa, A. A. (no date). Alfredo Acosta Figueroa 1965-1979, in Essays by Author . Farmworker Movement Documentation Project at the University of California, San Diego Library. https://  libra  ries.  ucsd.  edu/  farmw  orker  movem  ent/.
- 75. Smith, R. 1977. 'Lettuce picker may renew UFW, grower's battle.' Los Angeles Times . (August 22).
- 76. Pursley, C. 1960. 'McLaren precision plants test lettuce fields.' Western Grower and Shipper , 26 (January).
- 77. Tukey, L. (1979) 'Mechanical Harvesting - Coming or Going?' Western Grower and Shipper , 15-16 (August).
- 78. Anonymous. 1958b. 'Western business farmers lead U.S. trend; economists see raising market.' Western Grower and Shipper , 1 (September).
- 79. Anonymous. 1952c. Western Grower and Shipper , 42 (October). 80. Hager, P. 1984. 'UC research fund use challenged.' Los Angeles Times , B3 (May 12).
- 81. Crittenden, A. 1980. 'Farm research aims disputed.' The New York Times , D1 (December 3).
- 82. Kumbula, Tendayi. 1978. 'Chavez cites farm mechanization peril.' Los Angeles Times , A32 (February 12).

<!-- image -->

## References

Akram-Lodhi, H., and C. Kay. 2010a. Surveying the agrarian question (part 1): Unearthing foundations, exploring diversity. Journal of Peasant Studies 37 (1): 177-202. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  03066 15090  34988  38.

- Akram-Lodhi, H., and C. Kay. 2010b. Surveying the agrarian question (part 2): Current debates and beyond. Journal of Peasant Studies 37 (2): 255-284. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  03066  15100  35949  06.

Almaguer, T. 1994.

Racial fault lines: The historical origins of white

supremacy in California

. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Anderson, B. 2015.

From valley to sea: 25 years with the Coastal

Grower

. Salinas, Calif.: Monterey County Historical Society.

- Bainer, R. 1975. Science and technology in Western Agriculture. Agricultural History 49: 56-72. https://  www.  jstor.  org/  stable/  37421  09.
- Bijker, W. 1995. Of bicycles, bakelites, and bulbs: Toward a theory of sociotechnical change . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Bijker, W., T. Hughes, and T. Pinch. 1987. The evolution of large technological systems . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Binswanger, H. 1986. Agricultural mechanization: A comparative historical perspective. The World Bank Research Observer 1: 27-56. California Department of Food and Agriculture. 2021. California agricultural statistics review 2019-2020 . https://  www.  cdfa.  ca. gov/  Stati  stics/  PDFs/  2020\_  Ag\_  Stats\_  Review.  pdf. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Californian Agrarian Action Project v. Regents of University of California . 1989. 210 Cal. App. 3d 1245, 258 Cal. Rptr. 769 (Ct. App. 1989).
- Carlisle, L., M. Montenegro de Wit, M. DeLonge, A. Calo, C. Getz, J. Ory, K. Munden-Dixon, et al. 2019a. Securing the Future of US Agriculture: The Case for Investing in New Entry Sustainable Farmers. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene 7(1): 17. https:// doi.  org/  10.  1525/  eleme  nta.  356.
- Carlisle, L., M. Montenegro de Wit, M. DeLonge, A. Iles, A. Calo, C. Getz, J. Ory, et al. 2019b. Transitioning to sustainable agriculture requires growing and sustaining an ecologically skilled workforce. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems . https://  doi.  org/  10.  3389/ fsufs.  2019.  00096.
- Carlisle-Cummins, I. 2015. From ketchup to California cuisine: How the mechanical tomato harvester prompted today's food movement. Civil Eats . https://  civil  eats.  com/  2015/  07/  15/  from-  ketch up-  to-  calif  ornia-  cuisi  ne-  how-  the-  mecha  nical-  tomato-  harve  sterpromp  ted-  todays-  food-  movem  ent/. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Carter, R. 2006. Of things said and unsaid: Power, archival silences, and power in silence. Archivaria . 61: 215-33. https://  archi  varia. ca/  index.  php/  archi  varia/  artic  le/  view/  12541.
- Daum, T. 2021. Farm robots: Ecological utopia or dystopia? Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution. 36 (9): 774-777. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j. tree.  2021.  06.  002.
- de la Peña, C. 2013. Good to think with: Another look at the mechanized tomato. Food, Culture &amp; Society 16: 603-621. https://  doi. org/  10.  2752/  17517  4413X  13673  46671  1769.
- Desmond, M. 2019. American capitalism is brutal. You can trace that to the plantation. The New York Times , August 14, Sunday Magazine. https://  www.  nytim  es.  com/  inter  active/  2019/  08/  14/  magaz  ine/ slave  ry-  capit  alism.  html. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Erwin, E. 2019. As almond harvest picks up, so does the dust. Eyewitness News . Wasco, CA: KBAK, Fox 58, September 4. https:// baker  sfiel  dnow.  com/  news/  local/  as-  almond-  harve  st-  picks-  up-  sodoes-  the-  dust. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Estes, A.C. 2022. We're one step closer to self-farming farms. Vox , January 8. https://  www.  vox.  com/  recode/  2022/1/  8/  22872  749/ john-  deere-  self-  drivi  ng-  tract  or-  auton  omous-  farmi  ng. Accessed 20 June 2022.

- Friedland, W., and A. Barton. 1975. Destalking the wily tomato: A case study in social consequences in california agricultural research. Research Monograph No. 15. University of California, Santa Cruz.
- Friedland, W., A. Barton, and R. Thomas. 1981. Manufacturing green gold . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Gass, G.M., and S. Biggs. 1993. Rural mechanisation: A review of processes, policies, practice and literature. Project Appraisal 8 (3): 157-187. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  02688  867.  1993.  97269  05.
- Guston, D. 2000. Retiring the social contract for science. Issues in Science and Technology . 16(4): 32-36. https://  www.  jstor.  org/ stable/  43314  013.
- Guthman, J. 2004. Agrarian dreams: The paradox of organic farming in California . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Hearden, T. 2016. Almond growers urged to reduce dust during harvest. Capital Press , July 11. https://  www.  capit  alpre  ss.  com/ state/  calif  ornia/  almond-  growe  rs-  urged-  to-  reduce-  dust-  duringharve  st/  artic  le\_  a4610  97c-  91d9-  5e29-  8408-  77fc5  bf9f2  a4.  html. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Henderson, G. 1999. California and the fictions of capital .  New York: Oxford University Press.
- Henke, C. 2008. Cultivating science, harvesting power: Science and industrial agriculture in California . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Hughes, T. 1987. The evolution of large technological systems. In The social construction of technological systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology , ed. Bijker, W., T. Hughes, and T. Pinch. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Humphreys, L. 2005. Reframing social groups, closure, and stabilization in the social construction of technology. Social Epistemology 19: 231-253. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  02691  72050 01454  49.

Jain, S.L. 2006. Injury: The politics of product design and safety law in the United States . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kautsky, K. 1988. The agrarian question , Vol. 2, London: Zwan Publications. First published in 1899.

- Just, R., and W. Chern. 1980. Tomatoes, technology, and oligopsony. The Bell Journal of Economics 11: 584-602. https://  doi.  org/  10. 2307/  30033  81.
- Khoo, M. 2005. Technologies aren't what they used to be: Problematising closure and relevant social groups. Social Epistemology 19: 283-285. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  02691  72050  01455  06.

Klein, H., and D.L. Kleinman. 2002. The social construction of technology: Structural donsiderations. Science, Technology, &amp; Human Values 27: 28-52. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1177/  01622  43902  02700  102.

Klerkx, L., and D. Rose. 2020. Dealing with the game-changing technologies of Agriculture 4.0: How do we manage diversity and responsibility in food system transition pathways? Global Food Security . https://  doi.  org/  10.  1016/j.  gfs.  2019.  100347.

- Kline, R., and T. Pinch. 1996. Users as agents of technological change: The social construction of the automobile in the rural United States. Technology and Culture 37: 763-795. https://  doi.  org/  10. 2307/  31070  97.
- Kloppenburg, J. 2004. First the seed: The political economy of plant biotechnology, 1492-2000 , 2nd ed. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Mann, S., and J. Dickinson. 1978. Obstacles to the development of a capitalist agriculture. Journal of Peasant Studies 5 (4): 466-481.

- Martin, C. 2001. Mechanization and 'Mexicanization': Racializing California's agricultural technology. Science as Culture 10: 301326. https://  doi.  org/  10.  3733/  ca.  2016a  0011.
- Martin, P. 1987. 'California's farm labor market.' Agricultural Issues Center (AIC) Working Papers, No. 87-1. University of California, Davis, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics. https://  ideas.  repec.  org/p/  ags/  ucdaic/  291368.  html. Accessed 20 June 2022.

- Martin, P. 2011. California hired farm labor 1960-2010: Change and continuity. University of California. https://  migra  tionfi  les.  ucdav  is. edu/  uploa  ds/  cf/  files/  2011-  may/  martin-  calif  ornia-  hired-  farm-  labor. pdf. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Martin, P., B. Hooker, M. Akhtar, and M. Stockton. 2017. How many workers are employed in California agriculture? California Agriculture 71 (1): 30-34. https://  doi.  org/  10.  3733/  ca. 2016a  0011.
- McWilliams, C. 1999. California: The great exception . Berkeley: University of California Press. First published in 1949.
- McWilliams, C. 2000. Factories in the field: the story of migratory farm labor in California . Berkeley: University of California Press. First published in 1939.
- Miller, Jr., H. 1960. Swift, Untiring Harvest Help. In Power to produce: The yearbook of agriculture, 1960 , ed. Stefferud, A. US Department of Agriculture. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 164-82.
- Mitchell, D. 2012. They saved the crops: Labor, landscape, and the struggle over industrial farming in Bracero-era California . Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Mohan, G. 2017. As California's labor shortage grows, farmers race to replace workers with robots. July 21. https://  www.  latim  es.  com/ proje  cts/  la-  fi-  farm-  mecha  nizat  ion/. Accessed 20 June 2022.
- Mooney, P. 1982. Labor time, production time and capitalist development in agriculture; A reconsideration of the Mann-Dickinson thesis. Sociologia Ruralis 22 (3-4): 279-292.
- Murray, D. 1982. The abolition of el cortito , the short-handled hoe: A case study in social conflict and state policy in California agriculture. Social Problems 30 (1): 26-39. https://  doi.  org/  10.  2307/ 800182.
- Olmstead, A., and P. Rhode. 1988. An Overview of California Agricultural Mechanization, 1870-1930. Agricultural History 62: 86-112. https://  www.  jstor.  org/  stable/  37432  09.
- Olmstead, A., and P. Rhode. 2003. The evolution of California agriculture, 1850-2000. In California Agriculture: Dimensions and Issues , ed. J. Siebert, 1-28. Davis, Giannini Foundation: University of California.
- Ory, J., and A. Iles. 2021. Fostering healthy soils in California: Farmer motivations and barriers. In True cost accounting for food , ed. B. Gemmill-Herren, L.E. Baker, and P.A. Daniels. Milton Park: Routledge.
- Oudshoorn, N., and T. Pinch. 2003. How users matter: The co-construction of users and technology . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Pearce, C. 2019. Papery graveyards: Sense and silence with archives. Qualitative Inquiry 25 (9-10): 1115-1122. https://  doi.  org/  10.
- 1177/  10778  00418  792029.
- Petrick, G. 2006. 'Like ribbons of green and gold': Industrializing lettuce and the quest for quality in the Salinas Valley, 1920-1965. Agricultural History 80 (3): 269-295.
- Runsten, D., and P. LeVeen. 1981. Mechanization and Mexican labor in California agriculture. Monographs in U.S.-Mexican Studies: 6. La Jolla, CA: Program in U.S.-Mexican Studies, University of California, San Diego.
- Russell, E., J. Allison, T. Finger, J. Brown, B. Balogh, and B. Carlson. 2011. The nature of power: Synthesizing the history of technology and environmental history. Technology and Culture 52: 246-259. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1353/  tech.  2011.  0071.
- Saldaña, J. 2013. The coding manual for qualitative researchers , 2nd ed. Newcastle upon Tyne: SAGE.
- SchwartzCook, J.T. 2002. Archives, records, and power: The making of modern memory. Archival Science. 2 (1): 1-19. https://  doi.  org/ 10.  1007/  BF024  35628.
- Seabrook, J. 2019. The Age of Robot Farmers. The New Yorker , April 8. https://  www.  newyo  rker.  com/  magaz  ine/  2019/  04/  15/  the-  age-  ofrobot-  farme  rs. Accessed 20 June 2022.

- Stoll, S. 1998. The fruits of natural advantage . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Thomas, R. 1985. Citizenship, gender, and work: Social organization of industrial agriculture . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Turini, T., M. Cahn, M. Cantwell, L. Jackson, S. Koike, E. Natwick, R. Smith, K. Subbarao, and E. Takele. 2011. Iceberg lettuce production in California , 7215. Agriculture and Natural Resources, Publication: University of California.
- Valdés, D.N. 1994. Machine politics in California agriculture, 19451990s. Pacific Historical Review 63: 203-224. https://  doi.  org/  10. 2307/  36408  66.
- Walker, R. 2004. The conquest of bread: 150 years of agribusiness in California . New York: New Press.
- Wells, M. 1996. Strawberry fields: Politics, class, and work in California agriculture . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

<!-- image -->

Publisher's  Note Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Patrick Baur is Assistant Professor of Food Policy and Innovation in the Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems Program and the Department of Fisheries, Animal and Veterinary Sciences at the University of Rhode Island.

Alastair Iles is Associate Professor of Sustainability Transitions in the Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management at the University of California, Berkeley.