<!-- image -->

## History of Retailing and Consumption

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rhrc20

## Robot salesmen: automated food retailing in the United States, 1925-39

## D. J. Huppatz

To cite this article: D. J. Huppatz (2021) Robot salesmen: automated food retailing in the United States, 1925-39, History of Retailing and Consumption, 7:3, 261-276, DOI: 10.1080/2373518X.2022.2044196

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/2373518X.2022.2044196

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 04 Mar 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 190

View related articles

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## RESEARCH ARTICLE

<!-- image -->

## Robot salesmen: automated food retailing in the United States, 1925 -39

## D. J. Huppatz

Department of Architectural and Industrial Design, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia

## ABSTRACT

Over the past decade, self-service checkouts and app-based platforms have sparked a renewed interest in automated shopping. Yet the promise of an automated retail future -e /uniFB03 cient, convenient and cheaper -has a long history, little examined by historians. As an initial study of this phenomenon, this article focuses on food vending machines in the United States from 1925 to 1939, an era when the hopes and hype of an automated future were high. Industry boosters argued that the new ' robot salesmen ' would not only eliminate intermediaries such as store clerks and cashiers (and their associated labour costs) but that automated technologies would eventually replace traditional stores. Through an analysis of industry journals, collectors ' catalogues and the popular press, this article examines the rhetoric surrounding the potential of food distribution via machines. This hype is tested against the reality that some automated retail technologies succeeded while others failed.

## ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 23 October 2021 Accepted 14 February 2022

## KEYWORDS

Automation; self-service; distribution; vending machine; food retail

## Introduction

The time is coming when a large percentage of our commodities will be distributed by means of vending machines instead of the personal service of clerks, and the successful operator of the future will be the one who is now looking forward and making plans for the future. There are also problems due to the public nature of your business. Under this head comes such matters as sanitary and health laws, the use of slugs, vandalism, safety measures, and various other restrictions a /uniFB00 ecting the welfare of the public. 1

- -A.E. Gerbert, President of the Vending Machine Manufacturer s Association, 1928. '

In 1928, Gerbert s promised land ' -where American consumers can buy everything they need and desire via machines -seemed within reach thanks to the endless possibilities represented by ' automatic merchandising . ' 2 For retailers, the future would be /uniFB01 lled with ' robot salesman : reliable, predictable and able to work 24 h a day, 7 days a week. ' Less human labour promised greater pro /uniFB01 ts. For consumers, vending machines promised convenience, accessibility and autonomy. Yet, in the retail realm, as Gerbert outlined, entrepreneurs faced several obstacles: theft, taxes, sanitation regulations and a dubious reputation seemed to be holding the industry back from an inevitable, automated

<!-- image -->

CONTACT

D. J. Huppatz

<!-- image -->

future. Over the next decade, numerous innovations in retail automation continued to develop (some to the present day), but many more failed to deliver Gerbert s vision. '

Curiously, historians of retail and consumption have paid little attention to automation, while academic historians rarely mention vending machines. 3 This may be because vending machines only ever had limited successes. 4 They failed to make retail stores obsolete or even, as Gerbert predicted, deliver most commodities to consumers. But, in the context of the late 1920s, such a future seemed possible. In the previous two decades, the retail landscape in the United States had changed profoundly. Older ' dry goods ' stores and ' mom-and-pop grocers were disappearing due to the expansion ' of nation-wide chains such as A&amp;P and F.W. Woolworth. 5 Chain store managers, following ' scienti /uniFB01 c management ideals sought to rationalise, standardise and streamline food ' retailing in ever-larger stores. For consumers, these changes brought lower costs but shifted their relationship from one with local shop-owners and regional produce to one of anonymous transactions with national chains and brands. 6 The way Americans bought food was changing and it seemed -to some at least -that the future of retail was in automation.

But, though the 1920s appears to be an era of innovation and new techniques for automating retail processes, concrete research materials are di /uniFB03 cult to locate. Vending machine research is akin to archaeology -there are few comprehensive collections, categorizations or historical accounts. Rather, research comprises assembling fragments from trade journals, catalogues, advertisements and collectors ' catalogues. 7 In this article, in addition to these sources, I will focus particularly on the trade journal Automatic Age to map the successes and failures of automating food vending in the United States from 1925 to 1939. This brief history of an intensely innovative period is framed by a prehistory and the /uniFB01 nal, contrasting fates of two particularly compelling cases -the successful Canteen Company, a vending machine company founded in Chicago in 1929 (and still operating today), and the repeated failings of the Keydoozle, an automated grocery store founded in Memphis in 1937.

## Automatic boxes: early vending machines

Scholars generally agree that the /uniFB01 rst commercially successful coin-operated machine was patented in 1883 by English engineer Percival Everitt. 8 Everitt s Automatic Postal ' Card Box comprised a bulky cast-iron box with two compartments -one for post cards and one for prepaid envelopes -on a stand. It had a sloping top to write upon and the following instructions printed on its front panel: ' DROP IN A PENNY / PULL OUT THE DRAWER / SHUT DRAWER AFTER TAKING CARD. 9 ' Everitt installed the /uniFB01 rst Postal Card Box at London s Mansion House Station and, over the ' next year, installed almost one hundred more in the city s railway stations and cafes. ' 10 As well as the novelty of interaction with a machine, Everitt s Boxes allowed consumers ' to buy postcards after hours and on Sundays (when the post o /uniFB03 ce was closed), and in urban spaces not associated with postal services.

Buoyed by this success, Everitt designed and patented numerous coin-operated machines to dispense other small items (such as matches), as well as a popular weighing machine. In 1887, he established the Sweetmeat Automatic Delivery Company, stating that the new company would control over 1500 automatic boxes already in operation

<!-- image -->

and double this number in the next two years, supplying them to railway stations, pubs, hotels and shops. 11 According to one source, by 1901, the Sweetmeat Automatic Delivery Company operated machines on almost every railway station in the country (some 7000 ' in all). ' 12 Everitt s success and the potential of ' ' automatic boxes ' led to a /uniFB02 ood of new patents in the 1890s as other entrepreneurs and engineers entered the business.

In Europe, Cologne-based chocolate manufacturer Stollwerck developed a range of vending machines from 1887. Renowned for their packaging and advertising, for Stollwerck, their early machines -which resembled gothic revival cabinets -functioned as an extension of their branding strategy. 13 By 1893, Stollwerck had 15,000 of these machines installed around Germany. 14 But Stollwerck found that automated retail had limits. Disputes with local authorities arose almost immediately, including violations of local trade regulations (such as the ban on Sunday trading), taxation and concern about the impact of confectionary vending on children. The latter is a recurring issue, more recently related to the health e /uniFB00 ects of placing vending machines in schools. 15

Soon after these developments in Britain and Germany, vending machines appeared in the United States. 16 There, entrepreneur Thomas Adams -best known for his invention of /uniFB02 avoured chewing gum -bought the American patent rights to Everitt s vending ' machines and adapted them to sell his gum from 1888. 17 Adams ' famed Tutti Frutti machines comprised a simple wooden box with a coin slot and two levers that customers pushed down to allow the gum to fall onto a shelf. It had front and side porcelain panels, and was designed to be mounted on a wall. Consumers appreciated the novelty of selfservice but Adams ' real genius was in placing his machines on platforms of New York s ' elevated stations where customers had just enough time for a quick transaction.

Early vending machines introduced a subtle shift in consumer habits towards the idea of convenience -that is, via machines, people could buy certain commodities anytime, anywhere. Highlighting this, an author of an article in a 1891 issue of Scienti /uniFB01 c American wrote:

At the railway stations, ferry houses, and even upon the street corners, there may be found in almost every city and village in the United States automatic vending machines, which, for a nickel, or more or less, will deliver the various goods which they are adapted to sell. The purchaser may procure a newspaper and a cigar to smoke, or, if averse to the use of the weed, he may secure a tablet of chewing gum or a package of sweets. 18

But nineteenth century vending machines had numerous limitations. They accepted only one type of coin, o /uniFB00 ered no change, and dispensed only small products such as a single stick of gum, a match or a cigar. The coin slot mechanism jammed easily, and even early designers such as Everitt recognised that the use of metal discs (other than coins) -later referred to as ' slugs ' -to operate the mechanism was a problem. 19 Finally, from an operator s ' perspective, an automatic box was not an autonomous one: vending machines required humans to re /uniFB01 ll, repair and maintain them.

In the /uniFB01 rst two decades of the twentieth century, engineers and designers made incremental changes to vending machines, improving the coin mechanisms and adding an incredible variety of cabinet designs. Penny machines -especially the familiar globeshaped peanut and gum venders -were well established features of the American urban milieu. Yet the potential of automatic retail, boosted by tales of ' penny

<!-- image -->

millionaires ' such as Artemas Ward, remained. Building upon Thomas Adams ' foundation, Ward s wealth derived from the advertising, vending machines and newsstands ' concessions of New York s Interborough transit system. Upon his death in 1925, his ' estate was estimated at between two and three million dollars. 20 But such success stories were an exception in an industry comprising thousands of small operators and a myriad of machine types. As a whole, the industry was fragmented and unsystematic, with a disconnect between manufacturers and operators, and little regulation or oversight of either.

## From vending machines to automatic retail

In 1925, a group of Chicago manufacturers spearheaded a national organisation and accompanying trade journal, The Automatic Age , ' A Monthly Journal Devoted to the Interests and Promotion of Vending Machines, Self-Service Appliances and Devices and Automatic Merchandising . This represented not only coordination and consolida-' tion of the industry, but also marked a new era of innovation. Over the next decade or so, vending machines expanded from penny vendors selling small, singular items, to machines capable of selling almost any type of food. For machine manufacturers and operators, this was the beginning of an automatic revolution that promised to disrupt the retail landscape. The location of the organisation and the journal highlighted Chicago s central position in vending machine manufacturing, operation and promotion. ' 21

Chicago s centrality to the vending machine industry was due to a number of factors. ' The city had grown as an entrepot in the 1880s and 90s, the hub of a vast network of producers, distributors and consumers, then developed into an industrial powerhouse in the /uniFB01 rst decades of the twentieth century. 22 Its steel mills, metal foundries, Central Manufacturing District (by World War 1 ' home to 200 concerns and 15,000 workers ) ' and Clearing Industrial District, produced everything from automobiles to electrical equipment, and furniture to canned foods. 23 And, as well as its importance as a manufacturing and distribution centre, for vending machines producers and operators, Chicago was also a major candy producer and home to the nation s biggest gum manu-' facturer, Wrigley s. ' 24

Reliable statistics about vending machine distribution, pro /uniFB01 ts or market share from this era are rare. A 1926 article from The Automatic Age , ' Average American spends a Penny a Day on Vending Machines suggested that the ' ' largest single operator is believed to be William Wrigley, who recently purchased the machines in the New York subways, where approximately 10,000 are maintained. ' 25 In another 1926 issue, the editors roughly estimated the number of vending machines in the country:

If there are one to each thousand people there is something like 120,000. If there is one machine to every 500 there are around 240,000 vending machines. We think this is about right, although on almost every corner of any consequence in the country there is at least one peanut, one ball gum, and one match machine, not to mention a multiplicity of machines that are found throughout the country including penny scales. 26

While this represented the state of the industry in 1926, entrepreneurs and designers soon developed more sophisticated machines than these penny venders, expanding into both new products and new spaces.

<!-- image -->

The /uniFB01 rst, most visible change in the late 1920s came from designs of the machines themselves. Bulky wooden and cast iron cases were replaced by compact, sleek aluminium cases. Glass panels to allow consumers to see the products within and the polished, shiny surfaces emphasised the sanitary aspect of purchasing food via machine (apparently untouched by human hands). The sheer variety of machine types was impressive, and novelty remained an important marketing di /uniFB00 erence. The 1929 Robo-Sales Corporation s machine, ' ' The Mechanical Salesman , for example, featured ' a glass panel behind which stood a /uniFB01 gurine of a suited salesman who dispensed a gum-ball via a scoop once a consumer inserted a coin in the slot then nodded in thanks. 27 The interactive aspect of such venders blurred the lines between arcade games and more prosaic penny machines.

Another element crucial to their success was modern branding, packaging and the expanding mass market. Beginning in the 1880s and 1890s, more food products were industrially produced and packaged, resulting in larger markets, which, combined with railways and steamships meant manufacturers could trade nationally and internationally. 28 This coincided with standardisation in the size and price of products, with mass production increasing predictability for manufacturers. For consumers, industrial brands ' replaced the local shopkeeper as the interface between consumer and product ' as distinctive packaging and standardisation became familiar. 29 For manufacturers and operators, standardisation of size and weight meant less machine errors, while consumers could recognise the packaging and logo through the glass window.

Entrepreneurs, engineers and designers in the late 1920s trialled a great variety of new machines to vend food beyond packaged snacks, including sandwiches, pies and cakes, cold drinks, and even fresh fruit. These new machines took nickels or dimes and were capable of selling various products within the one machine (a range of candy bars, for example). It is hard to gauge the success of each but clearly many innovative machine types were trialled and promoted, and the Automatic Age provides some clues about the various successes and failures. Perishable food was obviously challenging to vend from machines, and sandwich, pie and fruit vending machines seemed to have come and gone during this era. 30 The Snapple Apple vendor, for example, which /uniFB01 rst appears in The Automatic Age in 1926 and is advertising in several issues, disappears within a year. 31 Nodoubt keeping fruit fresh and re /uniFB01 lling the machines required constant human labour.

A 1928 feature on Harry E. Anderson of the First National Sandwich Shops gives an insight into the complexity behind the scenes:

His company has 450 machines now operating in factories in Boston and vicinity. They take in an average of $1 per day vending sandwiches mostly, but some pies and candy bars … Mr. Anderson has a commissary on the second /uniFB02 oor of his assembly plant. Here two women are kept busy making fresh sandwiches and one baker bakes bread. All middlemen s pro ' /uniFB01 ts are eliminated. Boys with Fords service the machines every morning. 32

The labour required to create fresh sandwiches, /uniFB01 ll the machines each day and (though excluded from this account) empty them, is considerable.

The waste created in vending fresh food from machines was a signi /uniFB01 cant issue. A short article on the Industrial Food Service company in Connecticut, the largest sandwich machine operator in the country, notes: ' Mr Austin says his greatest loss is not from

<!-- image -->

slugs but from left over sandwiches. He salvages the meat in those sandwiches which keeps the losses down. ' 33 Austin s ' ' recycling ' strategy raises an important issue in food vending: hygiene. A 1926 article, ' War on Sandwich Machines ' notes that the police department of Birmingham, Alabama, were under pressure from the Alabama Retail Food Dealers Association to halt the spread of the city s new sandwich vending machines for health ' reasons. 34 It is safe to assume that eliminating retail competition was another reason.

## Slugs, taxes and reputation

Besides hygiene, other major obstacles for the /uniFB02 edgling industry group in the mid-1920s were slugs, taxes and reputation. In the /uniFB01 rst issue of the Automatic Age , the issue of slugs was raised by Frank H Vogel of the Columbus Vending Machine Company, who wrote, ' no practical coin detector has so far been invented and for this reason the manufacturers are sceptical about putting machines built to take in more than a penny on the market. ' 35 Certainly, new coin mechanisms for detecting and rejecting slugs improved the situation over the next few years but slugs remained an ongoing concern for operators, particularly as vending machines increased from penny to higher denomination coins, meaning greater potential losses.

One avenue to eliminate slugs was government regulation, with the vending machine industry supporting a 1929 bill before Congress ' making the manufacture and use of slugs to defraud coin machines a felony. ' 36 Another strategy was negotiation. In 1931, an agreement between the Automatic Merchandisers Association and the Allied Rubber Stamp Manufacturers Association (responsible for, among other things, manufacturing washers) arose. ' We understand wrote the vending machine association, ' ' the members of the Allied Rubber Stamp Manufacturers Association produce approximately 85 per cent of all tokens and slugs. When it was brought to their attention by the Automatic Merchandisers ' Association that the slug evil was costing the vending industry millions of dollars, their Board immediately took action as they have no desire to be parties to such a fraud. ' 37

Yet even with such regulation and agreements, a market in slugs persisted into the 1930s, perhaps spurred on by the Depression. A 1934 report, for example, noted ' a /uniFB01 rm in Brooklyn that makes blank slugs, a number of which have been imported at 10 cents a hundred whether they are for the quarter or nickel variety and the machine purveyors are losing money. ' 38 Slugs were not only a problem for vending machines, but also automatic turnstiles, pay phones, slot machines and amusement machines. 39

However, a 1937 report argued that slugs only ever accounted for a tiny fraction of sales from vending machines. It interviewed leading machine operators:

Nathaniel Leverone states that their slug losses are seven-tenths of one percent of the receipts of the operation of 45,000 venders of candy. Mr. Malkin of the Malkin-Illion Corporation reports that from his 100 /uniFB01 ve-cent cigar venders only one-third of one percent of his receipts were slugs. Another operator says, ' The /uniFB01 ve-cent machines will perhaps average around one and half percent; the higher priced merchandise purveyors will go up to perhaps three per-cent. If a machine is slugged often, it should be moved. ' 40

By 1940, slugs seemed to be no longer an issue. Due to ' the introduction of highly developed slug ejectors on modern bulk venders, the slugs found in the cash box are negligible and the slug problem is no longer prevalent among operators of modern machines. ' 41

<!-- image -->

For the vending machine industry, taxes were another limit on growth. In a 1925 issue of the Automatic Age , for example, an author noted a proposal to raise taxes on vending machines from 5% to 10%. Certainly some of these proposals were raised by rival distributors. In this case, the Restaurant Owners Association proposed and supported the tax rise with the aim to put new pie and sandwich vending machines out of business. 42 According to a follow-up announcement in the journal, this particular tax was rejected by the President. 43 However, state and local taxes continued to be an ongoing point of contention between vending machine operators and state authorities, and a signi /uniFB01 cant issue discussed in the journal. 44

Another hurdle facing vending machines was a popular perception of the machines with organised crime and gambling. This had two aspects. First, some unscrupulous vending machine sellers promised big returns for exclusive territories or deceptive contracts: such scams gave the industry a bad reputation. 45 Second was the machines themselves. Gambling machines were already popular, looked similar and operated with similar mechanisms. Indeed, Chicago s ' Herbert Mills company made both vending machines as well as the country s ' best-known gambling machine, the Liberty Bell three-reel slot machine. 46 During the 1910s and 20s, Mills produced combined slot and vending machines, speci /uniFB01 cally designed to circumvent rules on gambling machines. The editors of the Automatic Age often emphasised the di /uniFB00 erences between the automatic merchandising business and gambling, portraying the vending machine business as a legitimate business and operators as honest businessmen. 47

## Robot salesmen, robot stores

A signi /uniFB01 cant shift in the late 1920s was the vision of vending machines as ' robot salesmen and the promise of automated retail stores. The word ' ' robot ' was adopted from Czech writer Karel Č apek s 1920 play ' ' R.U.R. (Rossum s Universal Robots) , set in a ' ' future world in which automated workers have replaced human labour. 48 The word itself, derived from the Czech robota , meaning ' drudgery ' or ' servitude , ' became popular in the years after the play s ' American production in 1922. Despite the fact that Č apek s ' dystopian vision ultimately illustrates the destruction of humans via robots, the word gained popular currency as shorthand for machines that could replace human labour. 49 In fact, ' robot ' was used so much that a 1929 article in the Automatic Age included a guide on to how to pronounce it, suggesting (erroneously) that, given it was a French word it could be pronounced in a French manner, yet, as Americans, the author urged his readers, ' Pronounce it RUBIT . ' 50 Of course, vending machinehuman interaction was limited to inserting a coin, then pushing a button or pulling a lever, but robot suggested futuristic automation and functioned to obscure the human labour required to /uniFB01 ll, maintain and service the machines.

As early as 1910, Thomas Edison had predicted ' The Automatic Store ' as a possibility and, by the late 1920s, this vision seemed close to reality. 51 While some of the industry rhetoric (such as Gerbert s ' opening quote) suggested vending machines might soon replace retail stores, in fact, there were considerable e /uniFB00 orts within the industry to work with existing both smaller, independent stores and large chains. Automated retailing was promoted as an expansion strategy for /uniFB01 ve and dime stores, with storekeepers encouraged to increase their turnover via either in- store machines or machines placed

<!-- image -->

throughout their local neighbourhood (for after-hours sales). 52 This is a strategy which had some success, particularly with cigarette vending machines installed in chain stores such as the United Cigar Stores and in A&amp;P stores, on the premise that the machines would add to the existing business, speed up customer transactions, put empty /uniFB02 oor space to work, and cut down on service labour. 53

Launched in 1928, Consolidated Automatic Merchandising Company (CAMCO) aimed initially at working with chain stores. 54 The company comprised a collection of existing manufacturers and operators, including Remington (the arms manufacturers), The General Vending Corporation, The Sanitary Postage Service Corporation and the Automatic Ticket Register Corporation, whose reach ' includes some 85,000 units now located in 50,000 retail locations from coast to coast. ' Their customers included ' Woolworth Company, Liggett Drug Company, Owl Drug Company, Walgreen Drug Company, J. C. Penney Company, Happiness Candy Stores, W. T. Grant Company, United Cigar Stores Co., Schulte Company, Union News Company, Metropolitan Company, S. S. Kresge Company, McCrory Stores, and the Photomaton Company . ' 55 This large conglomeration planned to install vending machines into various existing retail environments to sell everything from cigarettes and candy to stockings and sanitary products. In 1929, CAMCO claimed ' Robots will soon sell groceries. ' 56

The major selling points for automated retail were cutting labour costs, eliminating human error and speed. In an article, ' The Selling Machine Arrives ' Dan Rennick noted that the ' Mechanical Salesman seldom makes a mistake, never loafs on the job, and waits upon customers at a breath-taking speed of eight seconds. ' 57 In a 1929 article for Scienti /uniFB01 c American , ' Robots for Salesman , Milton Wright sums up the aspirations of the era: '

Why have a high-priced human salesman perform the mere mechanical task of handing out a package of cigarettes, receiving a quarter, dropping your money in a cash drawer and passing back to the customer ten cents in change, a paper of matches and a pro /uniFB01 tsharing coupon? Why not have automatic equipment to do this automatic work, permitting the man behind the counter to induce the customer to buy a $2.50 pipe, thus being a salesman in fact as well as in name? 58

The rhetoric here suggests that much of retail sales work comprised automatic processes that could be replaced by a machine. Certainly saving on human labour costs was a key selling point for retail businesses interested in installing vending machines.

A successful precedent in this respect was the Horn and Hardart Automat. In 1902, Joseph Horn and Frank Hardart used German vending machines to create their /uniFB01 rst Automat in Philadelphia. 59 As their chain of Automats grew, Horn and Hardart developed a system -customers fed nickels into vending machine-style glass compartments and took plates of cooked food. Their chief engineer, John Fritsche, patented 30 vending machines based on the German model but with innovations such as insulated cells for keeping food hot and cold and a rotating mechanism to ensure that once an item was taken, another took its place. The Automat had casual seating, without waiters or snobbery, making it accessible to working-class diners, women and AfricanAmericans. Technology purported to solve the ' servant problem ' and to o /uniFB00 er the ideal of more democratic dining experience. 60 But, behind the interface, the Automat relied on human labour to cook and convey food to the machines, wash the dishes and clean the restaurants. 61

<!-- image -->

In the spirit of greater automation, various companies trailed ' robot ' stores in the late 1920s. 62 Coney Island hosted the /uniFB01 rst Autosales store, described as ' a fair sized confectionary shop ' that ' contains over one hundred units selling 1c, 5c, 10c and 15c articles ' including biscuits, nuts, candies, gum and mints, cigarettes and penny cup machines for the drink fountains. They aim to make this a chain store system selling small packaged goods. ' 63 The Autosales Gum and Chocolate Company was a large, national operation, a result of a 1911 merger of 18 vending companies (and over 250 trade names, including Adams and Stollwerck). While the 4th of July opening of their automatic store in 1928 was declared a great success - ' over 10,000 people were in the shop during that day; the venders made nearly 5000 individual sales ' -the promised chain did not eventuate. 64

Although these ' robot ' stores were primitive compared to Č apek s vision of humanoid ' robots, CAMCO introduced ' talking ' vending machines in Sears Roebuck stores in Chicago in 1929. These CAMCO ' machines sell two packs of cigarettes for a quarter and by means of a phonograph record thank the customer and repeat the slogan of the manufacturer. ' 65 Indeed, CAMCO s promotion of the idea of retail robots went as ' far as a regular column in the Automatic Age called ' Says Robot (later ' ' Robot Ramblings ) ' in which a robot ' spoke ' directly to readers:

I am the mechanical man. I represent the new-day system of Automatic Merchandising. My mission is to simplify and standardize selling … to multiply sales outlets … to release salesfolk from mechanical selling to a higher, more constructive and more pro /uniFB01 table type of sales e /uniFB00 ort. 66

But the Depression resulting from the 1929 stock market crash a /uniFB00 ected the vending machine industry, and even some of the biggest companies went bankrupt: Autosales in 1933 and CAMCO the following year. 67 With high rates of unemployment in the early 1930s, salaries for clerks and salespeople were no longer so expensive and experiments with robot salespeople and automatic stores ceased. Not surprisingly, the more innovative -but economically risky -vending machines, such as the complex and expensive ' talking robots , disappeared in the early 1930s. Two ' /uniFB01 nal cases I want to consider here represent two paths through the 1930s -the Automatic Canteen company, a success story launched on the eve of the Depression, and Keedoozle, one of the great failures of automated retailing.

## Success and failure in depression-era automation

Founded on the eve of the Depression, Nathaniel Leverone s ' Automatic Canteen Company was a surprising success story of the 1930s. In 1908, a young Nathaniel Leverone, arrived in Chicago where he began a career in sales for various machine companies. He invested successfully in the booming real estate market then founded The Automatic Canteen Company in 1929. Leverone applied a systematic, ' scienti /uniFB01 c management ' approach to retail distribution based on accurate data and analysis down to the level of each individual machine. 68 Canteen s main product was the candy bar and Leverone ' decided to distribute only nationally-known brands such as Hershey and Curtis, packaged in standard sizes. In 1931, after only two years in operation, the Company boasted 45,000 machines around the United States, and by 1935, this had risen to over 75,000 machines. 69

<!-- image -->

An important factor for this success was that Leverone exploited a new space for vending machines: factories. The Canteen sales pitch involved two steps: /uniFB01 rst, convince managers that workers needed a snack between meals. Leverone argued that ' candy, which had previously been considered as a treat for children, actually constituted a food which was the source of quick energy for hardworking factory employees. ' 70 The second step was to o /uniFB00 er the company a free trial of a Canteen machine. The glossy red machine immediately brightened up a dull factory and managers could see that their workers did not need to leave the premises to buy snacks.

Canteen s ' /uniFB01 rst machines were designed and manufactured by the Mills Novelty Company, but they soon designed their own, speci /uniFB01 cally for di /uniFB00 erent contexts. In a 1932 interview, Leverone reviewed this strategy: ' We have colorful machines for placing in factories. We have white-enamelled machines for hospitals, universities, and schools where there is desire to emphasize sanitation. ' 71

But beyond simply discrete machines, Leverone conceived vending machines as part of a networked service-system that included humans to re /uniFB01 ll, clean and maintain the machines. Canteen s company uniforms, livery and promotional material all re ' /uniFB02 ected a consistent aesthetic. Although new to the industry, Canteen quickly became the most successful vending machine business of the 1930s. 72

At the 1933 Chicago World s Fair, Leverone launched Canteen s new ' ' /uniFB01 ve-column candy machine, the /uniFB01 rst reliable machine that enabled consumer choice. 73 This machine also established Canteen s signature interface: a mirror and a glass case. Accord-' ing to Leverone, the mirrors improved sales: ' A man, pausing to adjust his tie in the mirror, would decide that a fresh candy bar would taste good right now. A girl, checking her make-up, would realize that it s a long time until lunch. The mirrors also protected ' the machines -because most people are superstitious and would not abuse the machines for fear of breaking the mirrors and stirring up seven years of bad luck for themselves. ' 74 Meanwhile, the glass case enabled the customer to see the available choice of candy bars.

The Canteen Company built upon their factory candy machine strategy during World War Two with military contracts. Military plants that operated 24 h a day further demonstrated the value of vending machines in workplaces for providing accessible food for energy and moral. After the War, Canteen expanded into corporate ' feeding stations ' that comprised banks of vending machines that sold hot and cold meals and drinks to factory and o /uniFB03 ce workers. Ultimately, Canteen s success was due more to Leverone s ' ' management abilities in developing a niche market and re /uniFB01 ning a service-system rather than in developing innovative automation technologies. 75

## The robot grocery store: Keydoozle

In the late 1920s, entrepreneurs attempted to build automated stores with little success. In addition to the Autosales snack store at Coney Island, Robert Harvey s short-lived ' Delamat (Delivers Automatically) of 1931 comprised a bank of vending machines in a room of a Manhattan apartment block. Filled daily, residents could buy groceries including vegetables, bakery goods, meat and canned goods, simply by inserting coins. Though Harvey planned more such installations, comprising 35 non-refrigerated and 5 refrigerated units, and o /uniFB00 ering 175 di /uniFB00 erent types of goods, the scheme quickly proved unpro /uniFB01 -table and failed. 76 A similar plan a year later in a Los Angeles apartment complex failed

<!-- image -->

because the machines ' could not compete with odd-cents pricing in the grocery stores and the units could not make change. ' 77

Such failures did not stop entrepreneurs trying. In 1937, grocery store innovator Clarence Saunders trialed the logical endpoint of automated retail, the robot grocery store, Keedoozle in Memphis. Before Keedoozle, Saunders had made (and lost) a fortune on his Piggly Wiggly grocery store franchise. Saunders designed an innovative store layout and self-service system with an emphasis on e /uniFB03 ciency, hygiene and low prices that launched in 1917. He franchised his ' Piggly Wiggly System ' so that, by 1923, there were over 1000 of these self-service stores across the country. 78 While Piggly Wiggly stores reduced the number of clerks and delivery boys (and their labour costs), Saunders aimed for greater automation (and less labour costs) with Keedoozle.

Keedoozle presented customers with a vending-machine-style interface of glass boxes. Rather than a coin, the customer inserted a key into a slot that created an electronic printout on ticker tape which they presented to the cashier when /uniFB01 nished. This was fed into a machine whereupon groceries fell down, vending machine-style, onto a conveyor belt behind the scenes where a sta /uniFB00 member bagged the items. Keedoozle promised fewer sta /uniFB00 , and Saunders believed automation would make shopping more e /uniFB03 cient and eliminate human error. Memphis newspapers referred to it as ' the robot grocery store . ' 79

Keedoozle o /uniFB00 ered customers signi /uniFB01 cant savings (10% -15% lower than regular stores). 80 It also o /uniFB00 ered the consumer a certain autonomy and (the appearance of) a hygienic shopping experience. In newspaper ads, Saunders announced the advantages of machine-delivered groceries and plastic packaging: ' Ladies can wear evening gowns in the Keedoozle. It is as clean as a bank. They don t have to touch a thing. ' ' 81 But the electronic system -the store comprised ten thousand electrical connections -was expensive to maintain and repair and did not allow for customers to change their mind. 82 Despite three attempts -in 1937, 1938 and 1948 -Keedoozle s ' systems proved too complex, error-ridden and unstable. None of the three iterations lasted more than a year. But this did not stop optimistic entrepreneurs trying again, with various revivals of automated retail trialled in the 1950s. 83 None of these lasted long either.

## Conclusion

As the promises of robot stores failed to deliver, even some within the industry began to doubt a fully automated retail future. A 1937 article in the Automatic Age explained ' why robots fail : '

- (1) Expense, which has been out of proportion to any possible pro /uniFB01 t. (2) Machine has to be very cumbersome in size in order to sell articles much larger than a cigarette package. (3) Di /uniFB03 culty of selling articles with odd cents in the price. 84

Ultimately, the modest Canteen candy machines provided a better model of where automatic retail technologies could succeed in the future. That is, their success lay in a limited range of products (particularly snack foods) sold in factories and o /uniFB03 ces: new spaces not already occupied by retail stores. As for the e /uniFB00 ects on retail overall, the vending machines of the 1920s and 1930s had a subtle impact on everyday consumption patterns by normalising a new human-machine interface and instilling in consumers the

272

ideals of self-service, hygienic consumption and instant grati /uniFB01 cation. In this light, the recent Amazon Go and Fresh stores are evidence that the 1920s vision of an automated retail future -already almost a century old -remains a powerful one today.

## Notes

- 1. A. E. Gerbert, ' Looking Forward, ' The Automatic Age 4:8 (March 1928), 28.
- 2. The dream is still alive today, exempli /uniFB01 ed by the 2018 launch of Amazon s sta ' /uniFB00 -less Go stores (also branded as Amazon Fresh). See Wing /uniFB01 eld, Mozur, and Corkery, ' Retailers Race Against Amazon to Automate Stores. '
- 3. Among the few academic references, see Epple, ' Automatic Trade. ' This general history is a good overview: Segrave, Vending Machines . Scholars have examined the related topic of selfservice. See Palm, Technologies of Consumer Labor , and Heyrman, ' The Introduction of SelfService and the Supermarket in Belgium. '
- 4. Instances of retail automation -even those with limited success -might complement established research on the networks of retailing and consumption represented by physical stores. See Benson and Ugolini, Cultures of Selling .
- 5. See Levinson, The Great A&amp;P , and Pitrone, F.W. Woolworth and the American Five and Dime .
- 6. In Chandler s classic history, he writes, ' ' By the 1920s … the chain store had become the fastest growing type of mass marketer and was becoming the standard instrument for mass retailing in the United States. ' Chandler, The Visible Hand , 233.
- 7. The standard reference for collectors is Enes, Silent Salesmen . See also Costa, Automatic Pleasures and Colmer, The Great Vending Machine Book .
- 8. Everitt and Sandeman s patent was ' /uniFB01 led in England on 21 April 1883, and in other European countries over the following months, then in the United States on 28 July 1885.
- 9. See Sandeman and Everitt s US patent, ' ' Apparatus for Automatically Delivering Prepaid Goods to Accord with the Price Paid Therefore. '
- 10. Author Unknown, Scienti /uniFB01 c American Supplement , No. 524 (Jan 16, 1886), 8366.
- 11. Colmer, The Great Vending Machine Book , 8.
- 12. Costa, Automatic Pleasures , 16.
- 13. For more information on Stollwerck, see Chandler with Hikino, ' Two German Industrial Enterprises: Gebruder Stollwerck and Accumulatoren-Fabrik AG ' in Scale and Scope: the Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism , 398 -408. Renowned engineer Max Siela /uniFB00 designed the earliest Stollwerck machines, and the company he founded at this time is still in business today.
- 14. Hauser, ' Stollwerck AG. '
- 15. There are many health-related studies in related to vending machines in schools, particular in the United States. See, for example, Hua and Ickovics, ' Vending Machines. '
- 16. According to some sources, Percival Everitt and founded a company in New York in 1886 to sell his Automatic Postal Card Boxes but I have been unable to verify this.
- 17. Redclift, Chewing Gum , 28.
- 18. Author Unknown, Scienti /uniFB01 c American 64:7 (February 14, 1891), 105.
- 19. In 1887, The Law Times of London cited a case whereby a prisoner unlawfully obtained a cigarette from a machine of the Automatic Box Company -he ' dropped into the slit in the box a brass disc, of no value, and about the size and shape of a penny, and thereby obtained a cigarette …' -and was found guilty of larceny. Author unknown, ' Crown Cases Reserved, ' 341.
- 20. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 1:1 (August 1925), 5. Academic readers may be interested to note that Ward bequeathed the New York transit concessions to Harvard University.
- 21. Other mid-Western cities as well as New York remained important hubs.

<!-- image -->

- 22. See the classic study of Chicago s ' early development (particularly the 1880s and 90s): Cronon, Nature s Metropolis ' .
- 23. Lewis, Chicago Made , 167. In this detailed study, Lewis makes no mention of vending machines, which suggests their marginal status within the city s industrial manufactures. '
- 24. Beyond Wrigely (who introduced Juicy Fruit and Spearmint gum to the city in 1893), other notable landmarks in Chicago s candy history are: The National Association of Confec-' tioners Association was formed in 1884; the Curtiss Candy Company (famous for their Baby Ruth and Butter /uniFB01 nger bars) was founded in 1916; and Frank C. Mars relocated his Mars Candy Factory from Minnesota to Chicago in 1929.
- 25. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 1:12 (July 1926), 59.
- 26. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 1:11 (June 1926), 13.
- 27. See illustration and description in Enes, Silent Salesmen , 98.
- 28. Moor, The Rise of Brands , 18.
- 29. Lupton and Miller, Design, Writing, Research , 177.
- 30. Segrave notes other key failures such as pop corn machines, fruit and juice vendors. Segrave, Vending Machines , 65 -7.
- 31. The Snapple Apple vendor /uniFB01 rst appears in The Automatic Age 1:10 (May 1926), then ads appear in various issues in 1927 and disappear after that.
- 32. Author unknown, The Automatic Age , 5:1 (August 1928), 44.
- 33. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 2:8 (March 1927), 10.
- 34. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 2:5 (December 1926), 69.
- 35. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 1:1 (August 1925), 5.
- 36. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:10 (May 1929), 33.
- 37. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 7:10 (May 1931), 108.
- 38. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 10:11 (June 1934), 105.
- 39. A 1935 report, for example, detailed ' Two tons of counterfeit coins -1,560,000 of them -cascaded into Long Island Sound last month propelled by willing police hands. They were the involuntary collection of the Independent Subway System, which has been garnering them through turnstiles at the rate of 1575 daily since the system opened on September 2, 1932. ' Author unknown, The Automatic Age 11:12 (July 1935), 103.
- 40. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 13:11 (June 1937), 152.
- 41. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 16:10 (May 1940), 70.
- 42. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 1:2 (September 1925), 9.
- 43. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 1:8 (March 1926), 14.
- 44. These are detailed in ' Taxes on Vending Machines in the Various States. ' The Automatic Age 1:11 (June 1926).
- 45. Noted by Nathaniel Leverone in Gladys, Nathaniel Leverone: Pioneer in Automatic Merchandising , 16.
- 46. The /uniFB01 re following the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 destroyed Fey s workshop and he ' never recovered his brief dominance of the slot machine market.
- 47. See, for example, ' In Some Quarters we have been Criticised, ' The Automatic Age 1:8 (March 1926), 16 -17.
- 48. See Č apek, R.U.R. (Rossum s Universal Robots) ' .
- 49. See Reilley, ' From Automata to Automation, ' 148 -76.
- 50. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:11 (June 1929), 16 -17. The author also erroneously refers to Č apek as Hungarian and his play as ' Ruvit s Universal Robots. ' '
- 51. Plotnick, Power Button , 5.
- 52. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 2:11 (June 1927), 62.
- 53. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:1 (August 1928), 18.
- 54. Franklin Delano Roosevelt was one of the company s original directors of CAMCO. '
- 55. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:11 (May 1929), 27.
- 56. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:2 (Dec 1928), 32.
- 57. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 4:10 (May 1928), 21 (this is the /uniFB01 rst special issue on Automatic Retailing).

<!-- image -->

- 58. Wright, ' Robots for Salesmen, ' 24.
- 59. On the German roots of the Automat, see Epple, ' The Automat . ' ' ' Horn and Hardart began with Max Siela /uniFB00 -designed machines, imported from Germany (see note 14 above).
- 60. Haley, Turning the Tables , 190.
- 61. Horn and Hardart paid low wages, o /uniFB00 ered poor labour conditions and were vehemently anti-union. The company s ' /uniFB01 rst strike was in 1917, and strikes continued through the 1920s, culminating in 1937, when strikers picketed dozens of Horn and Hardart Automats in New York in protest at their labour practices. See Shuldiner, ' Trapped behind the Automat ' and David Freeland, Automats, Taxi Dances and Vaudeville .
- 62. Segrave notes that, during this period, ' the industry and the general media would focus on the idea that ' robots ' could sell just about everything and were the future, ' Segrave, Vending Machines , 21.
- 63. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:1 (August 1928), 9.
- 64. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:1 (August 1928), 10.
- 65. Author unknown, The Automatic Age 5:9 (April 1929), 53.
- 66. CAMCO, The Automatic Age (Feb 1932), 255.
- 67. The complex unravelling of Autosales is documented in Kincheloe and Stull, Cases Decided in the Court of Claims of the United States, April 26, 1937 to December 5, 1937 , 229 -330.
- 68. John P. Mullen, ' Scienti /uniFB01 c Management of 75 000 sales Units, ' Automatic Age 11:7 (February 1935), 42.
- 69. Lester B. Colby, ' Misses Train; Catches an Idea: Leverone s Coin-Machines Work, ' ' Automatic Age , 8:12 (July 1931), 45; and John P. Mullen, ' Scienti /uniFB01 c Management of 75 000 sales Units ' an interview with Nathaniel Leverone, Automatic Age 11:7 (February 1935), 41.
- 70. Nathaniel Leverone, quoted in Zehnpfenning, Nathaniel Leverone , 99.
- 71. Lester B. Colby, ' Misses Train, ' Automatic Age , 8:12 (July 1931), 45.
- 72. A 1939 Time magazine pro /uniFB01 le of the Canteen Company noted their success lay in factories: ' Of the 200 000 canteens in 44 states, about 98% are in factories. ' See Author Unknown, ' STATE OF BUSINESS: Processes of Recovery, ' Time Magazine (September 19, 1938).
- 73. Zehnpfenning, Nathaniel Leverone , 125.
- 74. Ibid., 100.
- 75. The company, now known as the Canteen Company, continues to produce vending machines today.
- 76. See Segrave, Vending Machines , 36; and Vandemark, ' Automatic Merchandising , 36 ' -7.
- 77. Vandemark, ' Automatic Merchandising, ' 37.
- 78. See Freeman, Clarence Saunders .
- 79. Freeland, Automats, Taxi Dances and Vaudeville , 113.
- 80. Vandemark, ' Automatic Merchandising, ' 175.
- 81. Freeman, Clarence Saunders , 116.
- 82. Ibid., 113 -4.
- 83. See Vandemark, ' Automatic Merchandising, ' for details on 1950s innovations.
- 84. Author unknown, ' The Sales Machine as a Retail Outlet, ' The Automatic Age , 13:11 (June 1937), 111.

## Disclosure statement

No potential con /uniFB02 ict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Notes on contributor

D. J. Huppatz works in the Department of Architectural and Industrial Design, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia. He is the author of Design: the Key Concepts (London: Bloomsbury, 2020) and Modern Asian Design (London: Bloomsbury, 2018). He would like to thank Professor Laura Ugolini of University of Wolverhampton s Centre for the History '

<!-- image -->

of Retailing and Distribution for including an early version of this article as part of the online CHORD seminars in 2021, as well as the anonymous reviewers who added valuable ideas and references to the /uniFB01 nished article.

## Bibliography

## Primary Sources

Author Unknown. ' Automatic Post-Card and Envelope Distributer. ' Scienti /uniFB01 c American Supplement , No. 524 (Jan 16, 1886): 8366.

Author unknown. ' Crown Cases Reserved. ' The Law Times (March 12, 1887).

Author unknown. ' Invention in 1889 A.D. vs invention B.C. ' Scienti /uniFB01 c American . 64, no. 7 (February 14, 1891): 105.

Author Unknown. ' STATE OF BUSINESS: Processes of Recovery. ' Time Magazine . 32, no. 12 (September 19, 1938).

Everitt, P., and J. G. Sandeman. ' Apparatus for Automatically Delivering Prepaid Goods to Accord with the Price Paid Therefore , US Patent No. 323, 213. July 28, 1885. '

The Automatic Age , 1, no.1 (August 1925) to 19, no.12 (Jan-Feb 1945), online: https://aa.arcademuseum.com/. Accessed February 23, 2022.

Wright, Milton. ' Robots for Salesmen. ' Scienti /uniFB01 c American 140, no. 1 (January 1929): 24 -26.

## Secondary Sources

Benson, John, and Laura Ugolini, eds. Cultures of Selling: Perspectives on Consumption and Society Since 1700 . Abington: Routledge, 2006.

Č apek, Karel. R.U.R. (Rossum s Universal Robots) ' . Translated by Paul Selver and Nigel Playfair. London: Orion Publishing, 2011.

Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977.

Chandler, Alfred D., Jr., with Takashi Hikino. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.

Colmer, Michael. The Great Vending Machine Book . Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1977.

Costa, Nic. Automatic Pleasures: The History of the Coin Machine . London: Kevin Francis Publishing, 1988.

Cronon, William. Nature s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West ' . New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 1991.

Enes, Bill. Silent Salesmen: An Encyclopedia of Gum, Candy and Nut Machines . Lexana, KS: Bill Enes, 1987.

Epple, Angelika. ' Automatic Trade: Self-Service and the Polycentric Early History of Slot Machines. ' In Transformations of Retailing in Europe After 1945 , edited by Lydia Langer, and Ralph Jessen, 94 -103. Abingdon: Routledge, 2012.

Epple, Angelika. ' The ' Automat . A History of Technological Transfer and the Process of Global ' Standardization in Modern Fast Food around 1900. ' Food and History 7, no. 2 (2009): 97 -118. Freeland, David. Automats, Taxi Dances and Vaudeville: Excavating Manhattan s Lost Places of ' Leisure . New York: New York University Press, 2009.

Freeman, Mike. Clarence Saunders and the Founding of Piggly Wiggly: The Rise and Fall of a Memphis Maverick . Charleston, SC: The History Press, 2011.

Haley, Andrew P. Turning the Tables: Restaurants and the Rise of the American Middle Class, 18801920 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2011.

- Hauser, Evelyn. ' Stollwerck AG. ' Dictionary of German Biography . Accessed February 23, 2022. https://www.encyclopedia.com/books/politics-and-business-magazines/stollwerck-ag.

Heyrman, Peter. ' The Introduction of Self-Service and the Supermarket in Belgium (1945-1975): The Soft Underbelly of Europe? ' History of Retailing and Consumption 6, no. 3 (2020): 197 -215.

<!-- image -->

Hua, Sophia V., and Jeannette R. Ickovics. ' Vending Machines: A Narrative Review of Factors In /uniFB02 uencing Items Purchased. ' Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 116, no. 10 (2016): 1578 -1588.

Kincheloe, Charles F., and Harry N. Stull. ' Cases Decided in the Court of Claims of the United States. ' April 26, 1937 to December 5, 1937, 229 -330.

Levinson, Marc. The Great A&amp;P and the Struggle for Small Business in America . New York: Hill and Wang, 2012.

Lewis, Robert. Chicago Made: Factory Networks in the Industrial Metropolis . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2008.

Lupton, Ellen, and J. Abbott Miller. Design, Writing, Research: Writing on Graphic Design . London: Phaidon Press, 1999.

Moor, Liz. The Rise of Brands . Oxford: Berg, 2007.

Palm, Michael. Technologies of Consumer Labor: A History of Self- Service . Abingdon: Routledge, 2017.

Plotnick, Rachel. Power Button: A History of Pleasure, Panic and the Politics of Pushing . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018.

Pitrone, Jean Maddern. F.W. Woolworth and the American Five and Dime: A Social History . Je /uniFB00 erson, NC: McFarland and Company, 2003.

Redclift, Michael. Chewing Gum: The Fortunes of Taste . Abingdon: Routledge, 2004.

Reilley, Kara. Automata and Mimesis on the Stage of Theatre History . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.

Segrave, Kerry. Vending Machines: An American Social History . Je /uniFB00 erson, NC: McFarlane and Co, 2002.

Shuldiner, Alec Tristin. ' Trapped behind the Automat: Technological Systems and the American Restaurant, 1902 -1991. ' PhD diss., Cornell University, 2001.

Vandemark, Vern. ' Automatic Merchandising of Grocery Products for O -Premise /uniFB00 Consumption. ' PhD diss., Ohio State University, 1963.

Wing eld, Nick, Paul Mozur, and Michael Corkery. /uniFB01 ' Retailers Race against Amazon to Automate Stores. ' New York Times , April 2, 2018. Accessed February 23, 2022. https://www.nytimes.com/ 2018/04/01/technology/retailer-stores-automation-amazon.html.

Zehnpfenning, Gladys. Nathaniel Leverone: Pioneer in Automatic Merchandising . Minneapolis: T.S. Denison and Company, 1963.