## The  Cotton  Harvester  in  Retrospect: Labor  Displacement or  Replacement?

## WILLIS  PETERSON  AND  YOAV  KISLEV

The  prevailing  view  of  new  mechanical  technology  is  that  it  has,  in  large  part, pushed  labor out of agriculture. An alternative  hypothesis  is that labor has been pulled out of agriculture by higher wages in nonfarm occupations. The mechanical cotton harvester is used to test the two hypotheses. Estimation of a simultaneousequation  model  of the labor  market  for  cotton  pickers  reveals  79 percent  of the reduction in hand picking of cotton was due to increased nonfarm wages-the pull effect;  the  remaining  21 percent  is  attributed  to  the  decreased  cost  of  machine harvesting-the push  effect.

F ROM 1930 to 1980 the U.S. farm labor force declined by about twothirds, and the machinery-labor  ratio increased  nearly tenfold. The large-scale  substitution  of capital  for labor  in U.S. agriculture  is well known,  but the reasons  for this  phenomenon  are not. In much  of the recent  economics  literature the prevailing  view appears to be that new mechanical technology has displaced or pushed labor out of agriculture. As  noted  by  James  Holt,  "A  bedrock  proposition  of  conventional agricultural  wisdom  is  that  agricultural  employment  has steadily declined  in the  United  States.  In the  1950s  and  1960s  this  decline was especially dramatic due to an explosion of labor-displacing agricultural production  technologies." 1

Richard Day's  1967 paper can be taken as the most forceful  argument in  support  of the hypothesis  that  mechanization  was responsible  for "labor  push"  out  of  agriculture.   Day  studied  developments  in the 2 Mississippi Delta and attributed most of the reduction in the demand for labor  to  the  mechanization  of  cotton  harvesting.  We reexamine  the

Journal  of  Economic  History, Vol. XLVI,  No.  1 (March  1986).  ' The Economic  History Association. All rights observed.  ISSN 0022-0507.

The authors are Professor  of Agricultural and Applied  Economics at University of Minnesota, St. Paul,  55108,  and  Associate  Professor  of  Agricultural Economics  at  Hebrew  University, Rehovot, Israel  respectively.

We  are indebted  to  Claudia  Goldin,  Alan  Olmstead,  Vernon  Ruttan,  John  Straus,  and an anonymous referee for constructive comments on previous drafts of the paper. This research was partially  supported  by the United  States-Israel  Agricultural  Research  and Development  Fund, BARD.

- 1 James  S.  Holt,  "Labor  Market  Policies  and Institutions  in an Industrializing  Agriculture" American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 64 (Dec.  1982), pp. 999-1006. Quote from  p.  999 (emphasis added).

mechanization of cotton harvesting in the South, and critically evaluate much of the labor-displacement  literature. 3

Two  other  hypotheses  have  been  advanced  to  explain  capital-labor substitution.  One,  due  mainly  to Hans  Binswanger,  can  be  interpreted as  suggesting  that  on-the-farm  technical  change  in  agriculture  is  the major  cause of the mechanization  process.  Elsewhere we have argued 4 that  Binswanger's  explanation  is in error; it rests on a  misspecification of the induced innovation  hypothesis in its application to a single sector and  uses  questionable  data.   Our  conclusion  was  that  technological 5 change,  internal  to  the  farm  sector,  cannot  explain  the  revolutionary magnitude of the  postwar  farm  mechanization.

The third hypothesis is that rising wages in nonfarm occupations have drawn  labor  out  of  agriculture  and  new  labor-saving  technology  was developed  and  adopted  in  reaction  to  this  outmigration  to  replace  the people  who  left  farms  in  search  of  higher  earnings  elsewhere.  While under the two earlier hypotheses labor is viewed as being pushed out of agriculture  by  a  reduction  in  demand  for  its  services,  under  the  third labor  is  pulled out  because  of  a  decrease  in  supply.  Our  analysis estimates  the relative  contribution  of the two factors-new  mechanical technology  that lowered  demand for  labor,  on the one hand, and rising urban  wages  that  decreased  supply,  on  the  other-to  the  reduction  in the  farm  labor  employment  in  cotton  harvesting.  We  view  this  as  the most appropriate  test  of the labor-push  hypothesis, and conclude  from the  empirical evidence  that the pull effect  is almost four  times  stronger than the push  effect.

The issue addressed is of more than academic interest. If labor has in fact been pushed out of agriculture, then the research establishment and farm  machinery  companies  share  responsibility  for  the  social  costs  of the  large-scale  migration  of farm  people.  In  this case a concern  by  the government  over job  loss  in  agriculture  would  be  legitimate.  On  the other hand,  if labor  has  been  pulled  out  by higher earnings  in  nonfarm occupations, research  institutions and  machinery manufacturers  can be viewed  as  responding  to  market  forces.  Public  action  to  counteract these forces  would  probably  harm  society  more  than  it would  help by reducing growth  in real  income.

It will be useful  to compare the results of our empirical approach with Day's  method  of  analysis  which  was  to  "replay  the  history"  of  the Mississippi Delta.  Using a recursive  programming model, Day simulated the optimal combinations of crops, inputs, and technologies for each year successively  over the  1940 to  1959 period.  Among the  constraints of the programming model were the available resources. A factor supply was  regarded  as  "tight,"  relative  to  demand,  in  years  in  which  its constraint  was  binding;  otherwise,  a  surplus  was  indicated.  In  the context of the model, labor was in short supply between  1941 and 1949, partly due to war  shortages. Afterwards employment  in  the  programmed  economy  fell  sharply,  the  corresponding  yearly  constraints were not binding, and the implication was "that  such migration as may have occurred  [out of the region] was induced more by a push than by a pull  effect." 6

It appears, however, that Day grossly overestimated  the contribution of  the  mechanization  of  cotton  harvesting  to  the  reduction  in  employment. According to his model  100 percent of the cotton in the Delta was harvested  by  machine  in  1957  (see  his  fig.  2),  while  in  fact  only  17 percent  of the cotton was harvested  mechanically  in Mississippi  during that  year.   The  100 percent  level  was  not  attained  until  1975. 7

Technologies, and machine harvesting among them, were introduced into  Day's  model  as  they  became  historically  available,  together  with the  corresponding  per-unit  cost  estimates.  Relative  cost  effectiveness determined  the  rate  of  diffusion of  the  capital-intensive  technologies (subject  to  some dynamic  constraints)  and  thus  determined  the  reduction  in  labor  demand.  As  we  will  later  point  out,  it  is  very  difficult  to estimate actual costs accurately  because of depreciation,  capital  costs, performance,  repair  components,  and  income-tax  considerations.  An alternative  approach  is  to  use  market  prices  for  machine  services;  we use  custom  rates  as  a  measure  of  these  prices.   Before  1957  custom 8 rates  for  machine  picking  in  Mississippi  exceeded  piece rates for  hand picking (as can  be seen later  in Tables  2 and  3). Given  these data,  it is not surprising that, in fact,  only a small proportion of cotton was picked by machine in Mississippi prior to  1957. Only after that year did custom rates fall  below  piece  rates, with the latter  starting to increase  slightly. Before  that  time  it  would  have  been  irrational  for  farmers to  use machines extensively  to harvest  cotton  because  labor was  cheaper.

Even if Day's  model had replayed  history  accurately,  it is  important to recognize that it does not constitute a valid test of the  labor-push-by-

machine  hypothesis.  Between  1950 and  1957, and  coinciding  with  the increased  use of synthetic fibers, the real price received  by farmers  for cotton  in Mississippi declined  by 35 percent while cotton acreage in the state decreased by one-third. The decline in cotton acreage, and to some extent  the  replacement  of cotton  by  less  labor  intensive  crops  such  as soybeans, are reflected  in Day's results as a decrease in the demand  for labor. But the resulting surplus of labor should not be attributed entirely to  the  increased  use  of  machines.  Unfortunately  the  emphasis  in  the article on the effects  of technological change in agriculture leads at least the  casual  reader  to  this  conclusion.  Also,  as  we  point  out  later,  real piece  rates  for  hand  picking  of  cotton  increased  dramatically  during World War II and were  "out of line" with other wages at the end of the war. An adjustment  in this labor market  was to be expected during the 1950s.

il

Hand  harvesting  of cotton  was regarded  as one of the more  arduous tasks  in  agriculture  even  when  farming  was  characterized  by  backbreaking  work.  Efforts to  mechanize  the  task  go  back  to  the  early nineteenth  century;  the  first  patent  on  a  mechanical  cotton  harvester was issued  in  1850.  But  cotton  proved  a  very  difficult  crop  to  harvest 9 mechanically.  The  development  of  a  commercially  viable  machine  to harvest  cotton  took  nearly  a century.

During  the  process  of  development,  six  different  types  of  machines evolved: pneumatic machines, threshing machines, chemical processes, electrical  devices,  stripping  machines,  and  spindle  pickers. 10 The first patent on the pneumatic machine was granted in 1859. Machines of this type  generally  consisted  of a vacuum  tank  with  attached  hoses  that  a crew  of  operators  would  apply  to the  cotton  balls,  sucking  the  cotton into a tank.  Work on this type of machine continued into the  1920s, but the  machine  was  finally  abandoned  after  it  was  determined  that  an experienced  person  could  pick  cotton  faster  by  hand  than  with  the machine.

The  threshing  machine  was  designed  along  the  lines  of  its  grain harvesting counterpart. The entire cotton plant was fed into the machine for  the purpose  of separating the bolls from  the rest of the cotton  plant.

9 J.  L. Watkins, King Cotton: A Historical and Statistical Review, 1790-1908 (New York, 1908). 10 For a more detailed  description  of the early development of the mechanical cotton  harvester and of the various types of machines see H. P. Smith, et al., The Mechanical Harvesting of Cotton, Texas Agricultural  Experiment  Station Bulletin 452 (College Station,  1932); James H. Street, The New  Revolution in the Cotton Economy (Chapel Hill,  1957); Gilbert C. Fite, "Recent  Progress in the  Mechanization  of  Cotton  Production  in  the  United  States," Agricultural History, 24  (Jan. 1950),  pp. 190-207.  The  following  discussion  on  the  development  of  the  mechanical  cotton harvester draws heavily on Smith and  Street.

But unlike grain, where the entire plant matures at one time, cotton was not amenable to threshing because the immature bolls had to be fed into the machine along with the mature  ones. Hence this machine was also abandoned.

The objective  in chemical  processing  was  to extract  the cotton  seed with a solvent, and then use the rest of the cotton plant as a fiber source, thereby eliminating the need to separate the cotton bolls from the plant. Although  the  process was  claimed  to  be  a  laboratory success, it apparently  was not a commercially  viable  option.

In  1869 the inventor of an electrical harvester attempted  to apply  the principle  of  electrical  attraction  to  separate  the  fiber  from  the  boll. However  the  charge  proved  too  small  to  detach  the  cotton. Later attempts  to  combine  the  pneumatic  and  electric  charge  concepts  also ended  in  failure.

Cotton stripping machines, also known as "strippers" or  "sledders" were  probably  the  simplist  and  the  most  successful  of  the  machines discussed thus far.  First invented in  1871, the early models resembled  a picket  fence  pulled  down  the  row  of  cotton  by  a  team  of  horses  or mules. Many farmers  built their own strippers. Later models employed revolving rolls embedded with teeth to pull the ripe bolls from the plants without injuring the plants or the unripened bolls. These more advanced strippers have  been  used  extensively in  the  Texas  Panhandle  and Oklahoma.

Spindle-type  machines  remove  cotton  lint  from ripened  bolls  by means of revolving spindles, fingers,  or prongs. The first patent  on  the spindle  picker  was  taken  out  in  1895 by  Angus  Campbell.  Substantial improvements  over  the  original  spindle  machines  occurred  during  the next  half-century.  Probably  the  most  significant  breakthrough  in  postCampbell technology was made by the Rust brothers (John and Mack). The first Rust  machine,  patented  in  1928, utilized  an endless belt fitted with  rotating  vertical  rows  of  moistened  smooth  spindles.  The  belt containing the spindles moved  backward  at about the forward  speed of the machine so that the spindles came into contact with the cotton bolls at  a  relatively  stationary  position  thereby  avoiding  injury  to  the  plant and immature  bolls.  The moistening  of  the spindles was  also an important  feature  of  the  Rust  machine,  facilitating  a  more  thorough harvest  by causing the cotton  lint  to adhere  to the  spindles.

In  spite  of its  early  successes  in field trials,  the  Rust  machine  never became a commercial success. From the outset the Rust brothers were torn between two conflicting outcomes. They wanted to ease the burden to farm  people of hand  harvesting  that they  had known as boys on the family  farm  in  Texas.  But  they  were  also  concerned  that  widespread adoption of the machines would displace thousands of small farmers and farm  laborers. To mitigate  this phenomena  they attempted  to perfect  a smaller horse-drawn machine that would be affordable  to small farmers.

But this machine was not widely adopted, and the Rust Company  went out  of business  in  1942-a victim more of economics than  technology. As  indicated  by  figures  presented  in  the  next  section,  the  mechanical cotton harvester did not become  competitive  cost-wise  with hand harvesting  of cotton  in the  South  until  well  into the  1950s. Post-World War II cotton harvesters manufactured  by the major machinery companies utilized  the  early  Rust  technology.  Thus the  technology  to  harvest cotton  mechanically  was already available  in the  late  1920s.

## in

The principal  prices affecting  the cotton-picking labor market and the choice  of  cotton  harvest  technology  are  presented  in  Figure  1.  From 1930 to  1940  real  piece  rates  for  hand  harvest  of  cotton  increased  at about  the  same  rate  as  manufacturing wages,  a  proxy  for off-farm employment earnings. Farm wages increased relatively little during this period.  The  onset  of World War II precipitated  a rapid  increase in real cotton  prices and  piece  rates which  continued  until the end of the war. Relative  to both  manufacturing  wages and farm  wages, the wages paid for  hand harvest  of cotton  increased dramatically  during World War II. The  increase  reflected  the  shortage  of labor  in the  cotton fields during the war (the South lost 20 percent of its farm labor from  1940 to 1945) as well as  the  attractive  prices of  cotton.  In  the  post-World  War II  years real  piece  rates  for  hand  harvesting  declined,  but  the  ratios  of  piece rates  to  manufacturing  wages  and  farm  wages  in  1964  (the  last  year piece-rate  data  were  collected)  were  still  higher  than  in  1930.

In spite of the rapid  increase in piece rates during World War II, the cost  of  harvesting  cotton  by hand  remained  below the cost of  machine harvesting,  measured  by  custom  rates. 11 In  the 1930s,  immediately following the  introduction  of  the  Rust  machines,  the  cost  of  hand harvesting  averaged  about  25  percent  of  the  cost  of  harvesting  by machine.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  few  machines  were  sold during the period  and  that  the Rust  company  went out of business. By the  end  of  World  War  II,  piece  rates  approached  the  cost  of  machine harvesting. No doubt the shortage of labor and the rapid increase in the cost  of  hand  harvesting  relative  to  the  cost  of  harvesting  by  machine during the war  stimulated  further  development  of machines.  However, large-scale  production  of mechanical  cotton  harvesters  could  not begin until  the  economy  returned  to a peacetime  basis.  Even  during the first half of the  1950s, the downward  adjustment  of real piece rates  coupled with a slight increase in custom rates made widespread use of mechanical harvesters  still unprofitable,  except in California  and Arizona where piece rates  had  exceeded  custom rates  in the  late  1940s.

11 The use of custom rates as a measure of the cost of machine harvesting is discussed in Section

FIGURE 1 REAL WAGES AND PRICES

<!-- image -->

- * All  variables  deflated  by  the  CPI,  1957-59-100. See appendix  for  description  of  variables.

Notes: All  variables  deflated  by  the  CPI,  1957-1959  = 100.  See  Appendix  for  description  of variables and their dimensions.

As shown in Table  1 the mechanization of the cotton harvest began in the  late  1940s,  spreading  from  California  and  Arizona  eastward  to  the cotton-growing  areas  of  the  South.  By  1972 all  of the  cotton  grown  in the  United  States  was  harvested  by  machine-picked,  stripped,  or scraped. 12

The  substantial  differences among  states  in  the  percent  of  cotton harvested  by machine during  the early  part of the adoption  period  can be  attributed  to  environmental  and  economic  factors.  The  extensive, level  fields  of  California and  Arizona  together  with  relatively  high yields,  dry  weather during  the harvest season,  and  a  small weed problem  lowered  the  cost  of  machine  harvesting  and  hastened its

TABLE  1 PERCENT OF COTTON HARVESTED MECHANICALLY,  12 MAJOR COTTON-PRODUCING  STATES

| State           | 1949   |   1954 |   1959 |   1964 |   1969 |
|-----------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Alabama         | *      |      2 |      6 |     55 |     88 |
| Arizona         | 4      |     44 |     62 |     97 |    100 |
| Arkansas        | 1      |     16 |     36 |     75 |     96 |
| California      | 13     |     62 |     83 |     97 |    100 |
| Georgia         | *      |      3 |      4 |     62 |     90 |
| Louisiana       | *      |     28 |     50 |     78 |     97 |
| Mississippi     | 4      |     11 |     38 |     68 |     94 |
| Missouri        | 2      |     22 |     47 |     83 |     99 |
| New Mexico      | 3      |     10 |     50 |     85 |     98 |
| North  Carolina | *      |      3 |      5 |     59 |     94 |
| South  Carolina | 1      |      4 |      1 |     63 |     91 |
| Tennessee       | *      |      1 |      8 |     56 |     92 |
| United  States  | 6      |     22 |     43 |     78 |     96 |

Source: USDA,  Economic  Research  Service, Statistical Bulletin No. 535, "Statistics  on  Cotton and  Related  Data,  1920-73" (Washington, D.C., 1974), p. 218.

adoption in these states (Table 2). 13 Also piece rates for hand picking of cotton  averaged  somewhat more in the West than in the South,  further contributing  to  the  mechanization  in  the  former  states  (Table  3).  As shown by Tables 2 and 3 piece rates for hand picking exceeded  custom rates  for  machine  harvesting  during  the  entire  1949 to  1964 period  in California and  Arizona.  For  the  second  group  of  states  (Arkansas, Missouri, New Mexico, and Tennessee) custom rates did not fall below piece rates until  1954. For the third group custom rates did not become cheaper  than  piece  rates  until  1957.  The  same  is  true  for  Louisana. Consequently,  the pattern  of adoption  of mechanical  harvesting,  starting in the West and moving east and south, is consistent with  differences in the  relative  prices  of  the two modes  of  harvest.

The  dramatic  change  from  hand  to  mechanized  harvest  of  cotton which  swept  the  Cotton  Belt during  the  1950s and  1960s may give  the impression  that  cotton  producers  were  eager  to  switch  to  the  new technology  as  fast  as  it  became  available,  shunning  the  services  of family,  hired labor, and tenant farmers  that for generations had brought in  the  cotton  harvest.  The  scenerio  of thousands  of farm  people  being forced  off  the  land  because of the introduction  of new  machines  is the one envisioned  by the Rust brothers in the early  1930s, popularized  by John Steinbeck in Grapes of Wrath, and is a view commonly held today.

A careful  reading of the record suggests, however, that at least in the

(dollars  per  hundredweight,  current  year  prices)

TABLE  2 CUSTOM  RATES  FOR  MACHINE  HARVESTING  OF  COTTON, TWICE  OVER  COVERAGE

|   Year | Far  West   | Mid  South   | Deep  South   | Louisiana   |
|--------|-------------|--------------|---------------|-------------|
|   1949 | $2.50       | $3.00        | $3.80         | $3.50       |
|   1950 | 2.25        | 3.00         | 3.75          | 3.40        |
|   1951 | 2.50        | 3.30         | 4.15          | 3.80        |
|   1952 | 2.50        | 3.30         | 4.15          | 3.80        |
|   1953 | 2.50        | 3.30         | 4.15          | 3.80        |
|   1954 | 2.00        | 2.65         | 3.30          | 3.00        |
|   1955 | 2.00        | 2.65         | 3.30          | 3.00        |
|   1956 | 1.75        | 2.30         | 2.90          | 2.65        |
|   1957 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1958 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1959 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1960 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1961 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1962 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1963 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |
|   1964 | 1.50        | 2.00         | 2.50          | 2.30        |

Notes: Far  West  is  Arizona  and  California.  Mid  South  is Arkansas,  Missouri,  New  Mexico,  and Tennessee.  Deep  South  is  Alabama,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  and  South  Carolina. Source: See  Appendix  for  construction  of  data.

case  of  cotton  harvesting,  farmers  were  not  so  eager  to  reduce  their dependence  on labor.  As Pederson  and Rapier report  in 1954:

There is still considerable hesitancy in the matter of using machines. The mechanical picker can operate  well only when the ground  is dry, when weeds and grass are under

TABLE  3 PIECE  RATES  FOR  HAND  PICKING  OF  SEED COTTON,  SEASON  AVERAGE (dollars  per  hundredweight,  current  year  prices)

|   Year | Far  West   | Mid  South   | Deep  South   | Louisiana   |
|--------|-------------|--------------|---------------|-------------|
|   1949 | $2.93       | $2.60        | $2.28         | $2.50       |
|   1950 | 3.28        | 2.76         | 2.54          | 2.60        |
|   1951 | 3.40        | 2.83         | 2.93          | 3.05        |
|   1952 | 3.48        | 3.18         | 3.04          | 2.95        |
|   1953 | 3.00        | 2.85         | 2.89          | 2.75        |
|   1954 | 3.05        | 2.88         | 2.64          | 2.50        |
|   1955 | 3.20        | 2.93         | 2.76          | 2.65        |
|   1956 | 3.15        | 2.80         | 2.79          | 2.65        |
|   1957 | 3.18        | 2.73         | 2.66          | 2.60        |
|   1958 | 3.25        | 2.78         | 2.66          | 2.50        |
|   1659 | 3.23        | 2.96         | 2.89          | 2.65        |
|   1960 | 3.23        | 2.81         | 2.86          | 2.60        |
|   1961 | 3.25        | 2.76         | 2.82          | 2.60        |
|   1962 | 3.25        | 2.85         | 2.82          | 2.60        |
|   1963 | 3.30        | 2.89         | 2.83          | 2.60        |
|   1964 | 3.35        | 2.91         | 2.85          | 2.50        |

Notes: Far  West  is  Arizona  and  California.  Mid  South  is  Arkansas,  Missouri,  New  Mexico,  and Tennessee.  Deep  South  is  Alabama,  Georgia,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  and  South  Carolina. Source: USDA,  Economic  Research  Service, Statistical Bulletin No.  535,  "Statistics  on  Cotton and  Related  Data;  1920-73" (1974)  p.  86.

control,  when  cotton  is defoliated,  and  when fields are  long and  regular  enough.  The planter is torn  between  conflicting objectives  and  irreconcilable  operating alternatives. Time and again planters have remarked,  "If the kind of labor we had twenty years ago were available  today  they  could  keep all their  machinery."

The increasing  scarcity  of labor in the area  has raised  the  labor cost  from  a dollar a day  less  than  fifteen  years  ago  to four  dollars  and  more.  True  the  latter  is an  inflated dollar compared  to the former  but the rate of inflation  is not 400 percent.  Even  at this higher rate the planter frequently finds himself unable to obtain labor enough to perform the  essential  operations  during the peak  work  period. 14

During World War II and the years immediately following, one of the major  problems  faced  by  farmers  was  the  increasing  scarcity  of  labor and  the  large  increase  in  wage  rates  relative  to  prewar  years.  Cotton farmers were particularly affected  because traditionally cotton had been a labor-intensive  crop. As an illustration of the concern of farmers  with obtaining  adequate  labor  at  harvest  and  of  their  reluctance  to  use machines,  it  is  reported  that  during  the 1950  harvest  season  in  the coastal plain of South Carolina between 75 and  100 plantation  operators purchased  new  mechanical  harvesters at about  $8,000 per machine but let them stand idle in their sheds while they harvested their cotton using hired  labor. 15 The  plantation  operators  considered  the  interest  and depreciation  expense on the machines as an insurance premium against not being able to obtain labor. The Korean  War had just  begun and the producers  remembered  the  difficulties of  finding  labor  during  World War  II.  In  addition  to  the  higher  cost  of  machines  over  labor  in  the South  during  the  early  1950s,  cotton  producers  preferred  labor  over machine harvest because the cotton was cleaner and therefore fetched a higher  price  in  the  market.  Also  if the  producers  did  not  hire  labor  to harvest  they  were  less  likely  to  obtain  labor  for  weeding  and  thinning earlier  in  the  season  because  their  employees  would  seek  jobs  that allowed  them  to  work  more weeks  per  year.

IV

To measure  the relative  proportions  of labor push  and  labor  pull we construct and empirically estimate an econometric model of the cottonpicking labor  market.  We define  labor push as a decline  in the demand for  labor  resulting  from  a decrease  in the price of a substitute  machine (Figure  2A). Labor  pull  is defined  as  a decrease  in the  supply  of  labor due to  higher  wages  in alternative  occupations  (Figure 2B).

We propose the following two-equation model to estimate the relative

FIGURE  2 LABOR PUSH VERSUS LABOR PULL

<!-- image -->

importance of the push and pull effects on wages and employment in the cotton fields.

$$Q = a0 + a-iQ-i + a}P  + a2C + a PCT 3 + SD  + Q = / 3 0 + fS-\Q-\  + + + +  SD  + v Demand (1) Supply (2)$$

where:

- Q = quantity  of  labor  demanded,  or  supplied,  for  hand  picking  of cotton
- Q-i  = Q lagged  one  year
- P =  piece rate  for  hand  picking of  cotton
- C =  custom  rate for  machine  picking of  cotton
- PCT = price  of  cotton
- M = hourly  wage rate  for  production  workers  in  manufacturing
- Y = yield  of  cotton
- SD = state dummies and their  coefficients

A detailed  description  of the variables  and data sources is presented in the Appendix. A  few explanatory comments  are  offered here. Variables Q and P are  taken  as endogenous; the others  are  considered exogenous.  Data  on  quantity  of  labor  employed  in  hand  picking  of cotton  do  not  exist.  Consequently,  we  used  the  quantity  of  cotton harvested  by  hand  as  a  proxy  for  the  quantity  of  labor.  All  monetary variables are deflated  by the Consumer Price Index (1957 to 1959 =  100) and the equations  are  estimated  in double-log  form.

The demand for labor is hypothesized to be determined by the cost of labor, the cost of machines, and the price of cotton. The cost of labor is measured  as  piece  rates  for hand  picking  of  cotton. The  cost  of machines is more difficult  to measure. A commonly-used  technique  for measuring  machine  costs  is  to  synthetically  construct such  figures. However,  machine costs estimated  this way are heavily  influenced  by the underlying assumptions regarding the length and pattern of depreci-

ation, number of days utilized each year, capacity of the machines, and repair costs. A more subtle problem arises because of quality improvements  affecting machine  characteristics  such  as  capacity,  durability, and  operator  comfort.  Because  higher-quality  machines  are  more productive, but generally  carry higher price tags, the real cost of providing a machine service can decrease even if the machine's inflation  corrected price  is  increasing  over  time.  Another  problem,  more  specific  to  the mechanical cotton harvester, is that the cost of harvesting varies across areas  having different  field  conditions, even  though  the  purchase  price of the machine  may be relatively uniform  among states. Smaller fields, lower  yields,  more  rainy  days  during  harvest,  and  a  greater  weed problem in the South than in the West increased the per hundredweight cost  of  harvest  in  the  South  compared  with  the  West.  In  addition,  the special features  of the income-tax code including investment credit and accelerated  depreciation  lowered  the after-tax  cost  of the  machine  but are  difficult to  estimate  from synthetic  data.  Finally,  reductions  in harvest  costs due  to  new  varieties  and  to  better  defoliants which facilitated  machine  harvest  are not easily accounted  for in  constructing machine-cost  data.

Because  of  the  above  difficulties we  utilized  the  average  annual custom  rate  paid  for  machine  harvesting  of cotton  in each  state as our measure  of  machine  cost.  These  are  market-determined  figures  which reflect cost  differences among  states  and  over  time  stemming  from differences  in  machine  quality,  environmental  conditions,  the  incometax law, and cotton yields. The main difficulty  with using custom rates is the data problem. There is no comprehensive  series of custom rates by states,  over  time.  However,  some  data  from  various  state  sources  do exist.

For  the  1949 to  1964 period  the  most  complete  data  were  obtained from  Arizona.  A few  rates for  several other  states  were  obtained  from various  sources (see  Appendix),  and  the  series  was  completed  by assuming  a  fixed  relationship  to  Arizona  rates  over  time.  When  state figures were not available, we assumed them to be equal to other  states with similar yields and growing conditions as shown in Table 2. Because there was no established  market for machine harvesting of cotton  prior to the late  1940s, we must ask, what custom rates for mechanical cotton picking would have been had there been a market for this service. One way  to  estimate  these  rates  would  be  to  simply  extrapolate  the  1949 custom  rates  back  to  1930 by  multiplying  these  figures  by  the  USDA index of prices  paid  by farmers  for  machinery,  1949 =  1.00.  However, as  we  argued  earlier  in  the  paper,  the  increase  in  the  official  USDA prices-paid  index for  farm  machinery likely overstates  the true, quality adjusted prices for machinery services because of quality improvements in the machines. Custom rates should be a more accurate measure of the prices of these  services.

Information  is  available  on  custom  rates  for  combine  harvesting  of wheat  for  the  late 1920s  and  early  1950s. 16 In  nominal  terms  these figures increased  much  less  than  the  official  USDA  machinery  pricespaid  index  between 1930  and 1949.  In  real  terms  custom  rates  for combine harvesting of wheat declined over this period whereas the real USDA price index for machines increased. The difference  between the two measures is likely to be due to quality improvements in machines. It is  not  unreasonable to  assume  that  quality  improvements  in  grain combines were not significantly  different  from  quality improvements in cotton harvesters. Both machines evolved from pull-type implements in the late  1920s to  self-propelled  units in the  early  1950s. Also improvements  in mechanical  technology  affecting  gears,  bearings,  chains,  and hydraulics  were  applicable  to both  machines.  Because  the  grain  combine utilized the threshing technology of the earlier stationary  threshing machine, improvements during the  1930 to  1949 period in the mechanical cotton harvester  were probably  somewhat greater than those of the grain  combine.  Use  of  custom  rates  for  combine  harvesting  of  wheat, rather than the  official  USDA machinery price index, should provide a more  accurate  estimate  of  the  true  value  of  cotton  harvesting  rates. However,  because  the  information  on  wheat  harvesting  costs  is  also incomplete,  we utilized  the  two  series  in combination  in the  following way. For  1930 we assumed  that the ratio of  1949 to  1930 custom  rates were the same for cotton as for wheat. For the intervening years custom rates in cotton  were assumed to change proportionally to the change in the USDA machine-price  index.

On the  supply  side of the  cotton-picking  labor  market,  the  explanatory  variables  are  piece  rates,  alternative  off-farm  earnings  opportunities,  and  cotton  yields.  National  average  wages  in  manufacturing  are used as the measure of off-farm  wages. Granted, not all field hands who left  agriculture  found jobs  in manufacturing,  but  in  a reasonably  wellfunctioning  labor market manufacturing  wages should be closely correlated  with  wages  in  other  unskilled  and  semiskilled  occupations  over time. Because the price of labor is quoted on a per-unit of cotton rather than  per-unit  of  time  basis,  cotton  yields  are  included  in  the  laborsupply  equation  to  take  account  of  any  change  in labor  supply  which might  occur  when  yields  change.  For  example,  higher  yields  should allow cotton pickers to increase their daily earnings given the piece rate and  should  therefore  bring  forth  a  greater  supply  of  labor  than  when yields are  lower.

The  data  set  is  a  pooled  time-series  and  cross-section  for  12 of  the major  cotton-producing  states  encompassing  the  1930  to  1964  period

(420 observations). 17 The  observations  begin in  1930 because  the  postWorld War II machines utilized the basic spindle technology  developed by  the  Rust brothers in the  late 1920s.  Working  models  of  these machines existed  in the early  1930s. 18 Also the International  Harvester Company continued to develop and produce working models of spindletype  harvesters  throughout  the  1920s,  1930s, and  1940s, but  relatively few  were  sold. 19 The  observations  end  in  1964,  the  last  year  data  on piece rates for hand picking were collected; 75 percent of the cotton for these 12  states was harvested mechanically (picked, stripped, or scraped)  in  1964.

The  demand  and  supply  equations  were  estimated simultaneously using two-stage  least  squares, corrected  for  serial correlation  using the Cochrane-Orcutt iterative technique in conjunction  with the Fair procedure for  reducing  the  bias  due to the inclusion  of a lagged  endogenous variable. 20 The model is one of partial equilibrium focusing on the price and quantity of labor for hand picking of cotton. In principle, the cost of harvesting cotton will affect the supply of the product, which in turn will affect  the  price  and  quantity  of  cotton  produced.  However  during  the period  under  consideration  the  effects  on  the  price  of  cotton  due  to changes in harvest  technology  are likely to have been  small relative to the effects  of large changes in the demand for the product resulting from the Great Depression, World War II, and the increased use of synthetic fibers in the  manufacture  of tires and  clothing after  World  War II.

The  results  of  estimating  the  labor  demand  and  supply  equations  by two-stage least squares are presented in Table  4.  All continuous variables are  in log form,  and  the coefficients  are short-run  elasticities. Long-run elasticities are calculated by  dividing the corresponding coefficients  by  (1  - a\_0  and  (1  -j8\_i)  and  are  shown  in  the  second column.

The elasticities reported in Table 4 are used to compute the changes in piece rates  and  the  quantity  of  labor  for  hand  picking  of cotton  by  the shifts  in  the  demand  for  and  supply  of  this  labor.  The  first  step  is  to solve for the equilibrium values of the endogenous variables as shown in

TABLE  4 ESTIMATED COEFFICIENTS OF THE STRUCTURAL MODEL, EQUATIONS  1  AND 2

| Variables                | Demand      | Demand    | Demand   | Supply      | Supply    | Supply   |
|--------------------------|-------------|-----------|----------|-------------|-----------|----------|
| Variables                | Coefficient | Estimated | Long Run | Coefficient | Estimated | Long Run |
| Lagged 0  (2-i)          | «-i         | 0.807     |          | ft-,        | 0.401     |          |
| Lagged 0  (2-i)          |             | (20.7)    |          |             | (5.23)    |          |
| Piece rates   (P)        | a.          | -0.628    | -3.25    | ft          | 1.28      | 2.14     |
| Piece rates   (P)        |             | (-5.92)   |          |             | (9.28)    |          |
| Custom rates (C)         | a2          | 0.243     | 1.26     |             |           |          |
| Custom rates (C)         |             | (5.20)    |          |             |           |          |
| Cotton  prices   (PCT)   | a,          | 0.969     | 5.02     |             |           |          |
| Cotton  prices   (PCT)   |             | (8.52)    |          |             |           |          |
| Manufacturing  wages (HO |             |           |          | ft          | -2.51     | -4.19    |
| Manufacturing  wages (HO |             |           |          |             | (-14.1)   |          |
| Yields  (Y)              |             |           |          | ft          | 0.790     | 1.32     |
| Yields  (Y)              |             |           |          |             | (10.4)    |          |
| Rho                      |             | -0.080    |          |             | 0.625     |          |
| Rho                      |             | (-1.63)   |          |             | (15.9)    |          |
| Durbin-Watson  statistic |             | 2.01      |          |             | 2.06      |          |

Notes: Number of observations = 420; /-statistics are given in parentheses. "Long Run" is defined in the text. Estimating technique is simultaneous equations. 2SLS corrected for serial correlation; see text.  Other  variables included:  state dummies.

the  reduced  form  equations  3 and 4. (The lagged  dependent  variable, Q-\, and  the  state  dummies  are  omitted  from  the  reduced  forms  to simplify  the equations.)

$$P = 1 -Q1 Pi · (A,  + +  p3Y  a0  a2C  a3PCT) (3)$$

$$Q = Oil -Pi (j8o  + + foY) --Pi (a0  + a2C + a^PCT) (4)$$

Equations  3  and  4  are  used  to  compute  the  calculated  effects  of changes in custom rates and manufacturing  wages on piece rates and the quantity  of  labor.  The  calculations  simulate  average  annual  rates  of change for the observed  period  (see Table  5). For example,  over the sample  period,  1930 to  1964, real  custom  rates  in  cotton  harvesting declined at an average annual rate of 3.77 percent (column  1). To obtain the annual horizontal shift in the labor-demand  equation due to changes in  custom  rates  we  solve  for  the  time  change  of  the  reduced form equation 3:

$${PIP)c = 1 (5) [~œ(CIC)] Q1 B$$

(The subscript c indicates that the solution is for the partial effect  of the piece rate of custom rate changes only.) The result (-0.480) is shown in

TABLE  5 SIMULATED CHANGES (percent  per year)

|                        | Exogenous          | Endogenous   | Endogenous      |                 |
|------------------------|--------------------|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|
|                        | Change in Variable | Change in    | Change in Labor | Share Explained |
|                        |                    | Piece Rates  | (3)             |                 |
|                        | (1)                | (2)          |                 | (4)             |
| Custom rates           | -3.77              | -0.480       | -0.614          | 21%             |
| Wages in manufacturing | 2.73               | 3.59         | -2.25           | 79              |
| Total                  |                    |              | -2.86           | 100%            |

## Notes

Column 1: Annual rate of change; the value of r estimated in the regression log x (/) = a + rt + sd + u for each variable x; sd is the set of state dummy variables and their coefficients.

Column 2: Column  1 times its corresponding elasticity in Table 4 times  l/(a,  /3,). Endogenous rates are simulated. (See, for  example, equation 5.)

Column  3:  Column  2  times  the  corresponding  elasticity  of  supply  for  demand  shifts  and  the corresponding elasticity of demand for supply shifts. (See equation 6.)

Column 4: Column 3 divided by  -2.86.

column  2 of Table  5. The  same procedure  is used  to obtain  the  annual percent  decrease  in  the  labor-supply  function and  the consequent increase  in  piece  rates  due  to  the  increase  in  manufacturing  wages. (Calculations  using  the  long-run  coefficients  are  not  shown  in Table 5 because they yield the  same relative  price and quantity  changes.)

We are mainly interested in the impact of the changes in custom rates and  manufacturing  wages  on  the  equilibrium  quantity  of  labor.  The decrease in the demand for labor caused by the decline in custom  rates decreases piece rates and the quantity of labor supplied. The calculated decrease  in  quantity  supplied  is  obtained  by  multiplying  the  annual percentage  change  in  price  (piece  rates)  by  the  supply  elasticity,  as shown by equation  6.

$$iQ/Q)c = fr{P/P)c (6) ß (PIP) c$$

The  result  (-0.614)  is  shown  in  column  3 of  Table  5.  Similarly,  the decrease  in  quantity  of  labor  demanded  due  to the  decrease  in  supply (the latter caused by the increase in manufacturing wages) is determined by  multiplying  the  resulting  annual  increase  in  piece  rates  times  the corresponding  demand  elasticity  for  labor  (3.59  x  -0.628  =  -2.25). Both  demand  and  supply  shifts decrease  the  quantity  of  labor  exchanged  in the market,  thus the effects  on  quantity  are  cumulative.

According  to  the  results  shown  in  column  3  of  Table  5,  about  21 percent of the total decrease in hand picking labor is due to the decrease in demand caused  by mechanization  (-0.614/-2.86).  The remaining 79 percent  is  accounted  for  by  the  decrease  in  supply  caused  by  higher wages  in off-farm  occupations.  Thus  the  pull  effect  on  labor  supply  is much  more  important  than the  push  effect  in explaining  the  decline  in labor  employed  in picking cotton  over the  period  studied.

The evidence presented  is consistent  with the hypothesis that  cotton harvesting  labor  was  in  large  part  pulled  out  of  agriculture  by  higher wages in nonfarm  occupations rather than displaced by the mechanical cotton  picker.  While  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  generalize these results to all of agriculture, the cotton harvester is by no means a special case of labor pull. The results should at least prompt one to question the popular  assumption  that  farm people  have  been "tractored off of farms,"  in effect  losing their jobs  to  machines.

The study  also highlights  the close  relationship  between  the  agricultural and nonagricultural labor markets in a setting of economic growth. As wages increase  in nonfarm  occupations  and farm  workers leave  to take advantage  of  better earnings opportunities off the farm, the remaining farmers  have no choice but to mechanize jobs  such as  hand picking  of  cotton  where  the  hourly  marginal  revenue  product  of  labor falls  below its opportunity cost.  Farm machinery companies along with state agricultural experiment  stations respond  to the increased  demand by farmers  for new mechanical technology by developing such technology. For the most part, the change in the structure of agriculture toward larger  and  more  mechanized  farms  is  part  of  the  process  of  economic growth  that  increases  the  price  of  labor  relative  to  that  of  machinery services. 21

## Appendix

## DEFINITIONS AND  CONSTRUCTION  OF VARIABLES

Quantity of labor: There are  no data  on days of labor  devoted  to picking cotton.  We, therefore,  measured  labor as bales of cotton picked by hand and obtained  the  measure by multiplying total bales of cotton harvested  in each state by the proportion picked by hand.

Piece rates: Prices paid  by farmers  in each  of the  12 states to pick  100 pounds of seed cotton.

Price of cotton: Price received by farmers in each of the 12 states. In Figure 1 the price is quoted  per  10 pounds to make the  size of the figures compatible  with the  scale  of the vertical axis. In the regression,  cotton  price  is lagged one  year.

Cotton  yields: Pounds of cotton per harvested  acre  in each  of the  12 states.

Custom rates: Prices paid by farmers  to machine pick  100 pounds of seed cotton, twice over coverage.

Manufacturing  wages: National average hourly earnings of production  workers.  In the regression  they are lagged one  year.

Farm wages: In Figure  1  the national average daily rate is divided by 10 to approximate an hourly wage.

## DATA SOURCES

Machine prices paid by farmers: For USDA index see U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural  Statistics (Washington, D.C.,  1952), p. 684 and  1967, p. 564.

Manufacturing  wages:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office, Economic  Report  of  the President (Washington,  D.C.,  1969), p. 261.

Farm  wages:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, Farm  Labor (Washington, D.C., respective  years).

Custom rates,  1930-1948: For sources of custom rates for combine harvesting of wheat, see fn.  16.

Custom  rates,  1949-1964:

Arizona: Arizona  Agriculture, Arizona  Agricultural  Experiment  Station  (Tucson,  respective  years).

Arkansas: Billy V. Lessley and James H. White, "Crop Enterprises on Cotton Farms in Southeast Arkansas," Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station Report Series No. 111 (Fayetteville,  June  1962), p. 8.

Georgia:  James  C.  Fortson,  "Break-even  Points  for  Harvesting  Machines,"  Georgia Agricultural  Experiment  Station  Bulletin No. 66 (Athens, Dec.  1959), p. 78.

Louisana:  Lonnie  L.  Fields and  Suresh R.  Landhe,  "Farm  Planning Guides for  Small Farms,"  Louisiana  Department  of  Agricultural  Economic  Report  No.  350  (Baton Rouge, Jan.  1966), p. 92-93.

Mississippi: Morris M. Lindsey, "An Economic Analysis of Custom Work on Farms in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta," Mississippi Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. 667 (State  College, June  1963), p. 9.

Data for other cotton variables are from  U.S. Department of Agriculture, "Statistics on Cotton  and  Related  Data," Statistical  Bulletin 535 (Washington, D.C.,  1974).