## The Effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 on the Southern Seamless Hosiery and Lumber Industries

ANDREW J.  SELTZER

The  Fair Labor  Standards  Act  of  1938 imposed  a binding  minimum  wage  on  the southern seamless hosiery and lumber industries. However,  the process of  adjusting to  the  new  minimum  differed across  the  two  industries.  Seamless  hosiery  firms substituted  capital  for  labor  and  converted  or  replaced  old  machinery. Southern lumber firms employed  fewer  workers relative to northern  and western  firms,  however, changes in their resource base and war-related  government purchases  prevented an absolute decrease in employment  levels. Numerous southern  lumber firms continued to pay less than minimum rates by illegally evading the act or taking  advantage of the intra-state  exemption.

A lthough  hundreds  of  recent  studies  have  examined  the  effects  of changes in the minimum wage, there has been little research on the impact of the first long-lived federal minimum wage law-the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA). The lack of historical analysis is particularly  surprising  given  Gavin  Wright's  contention  that the FLSA  was an integral part of an interwar federal "assault on the low-wage economy" of the  South  and  that  it  had  "[t]he  most  direct  federal  effect  on  Southern wages"  of  any  interwar  policy.   Wright  further  argues  that  the  assault 1 would  have  profound  long-term  consequences  for  southern  economic development:  "[P]olitical  pressures  on the  labor market  imposed  wage convergence" between the North and South and this "effectively  [blocked] the low-wage expansion path for [southern] industry."  Over the following 2 decades,  the  invention,  improvement,  and  widespread  diffusion  of  the mechanical cotton picker resolved the "harvest bottleneck" causing widespread unemployment amongst millions of predominantly black agricultural  workers. With the low-wage expansion path blocked to the  South, many of these workers migrated to the North. Although Wright provides

The Journal  of  Economic  History, Vol.  57,  No.  2  (June  1997).  '  The  Economic  History Association. All rights reserved. ISSN 0022-0507.

Andrew J.  Seltzer, Department  of Business Development and  Corporate History, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

I wish to thank Lee Alston, Jeremy Atack, Wallace Hendricks, Peter Kenyon, Pablo Spiller, and the participants at seminars at the Australian Labour Market Research Conference, Australian National University, La Trobe University, and Central Queensland University for their comments.  I have also benefited from comments by the editor and two anonymous referees at this JOURNAL. Funding from the Faculty of Economics at the University of Melbourne is acknowledged. Remaining errors are entirely my own.

'Wright, Old South, p. 219.

2 Ibid., pp.  199,208.

convincing  evidence that the FLSA had  a dramatic  impact  on wages  in low-wage southern industries such as textiles, lumber, and tobacco and that southern industrialists feared the effects of the minimum wage, he provides little evidence of the actual effects  of the FLSA on southern  employment, production technology, or low-wage industrial  development.

The minimum wage was one of the most politically volatile issues of its time. As part of a compromise to reduce the impact on low-wage employers, Congress decided to phase in the $0.40 minimum wage agreed upon in the act.  An across-the-board $0.25 minimum was implemented in Octo3 ber 1938. Thereafter, Industry Committees composed of representatives of employers,  employees,  and  the  public  were  empowered  to  determine industry-specific  increases, with the broad mandate of bringing the industry minimum up to $0.40 as quickly as possible without causing significant unemployment, but no later than October  1945. The Industry Committees held  hearings  where representatives  of both  labor and  industry  testified about their experiences with the minimum rates. The Industry Committees also  commissioned  studies  by  the  United  States  Department  of  Labor (USDL) and the Bureau of Labor  Statistics  (BLS) on the impact of the minimum  wage upon  individual  industries.  The  data  that  these  studies produced provide the most comprehensive industry-specific  indicators of the effects  of any American minimum wage.

This article uses quantitative and qualitative evidence from the BLS and USDL studies and the Industry Committees' hearings to examine the  effects of the minimum wage on two of the South's most important manufacturing  industries-seamless  hosiery  and  lumber.   These  industries  are 4 excellent candidates for case studies of the effects  of the FLSA for several reasons. Firstly, both hosiery and lumber had among the highest levels of employment of any southern industries covered by the act.  Secondly, both 5 industries paid low wages prior to the implementation of the FLSA. Wright specifically  identifies  the industries  as being among the most  adversely affected  by the act.  Thirdly, labor costs composed  a high proportion  of 6 total costs in both industries. According to the Census of  Manufacturers, labor costs  in seamless  hosiery and  lumber were  30.1  percent  and  32.4

3

See Seltzer, "Political  Economy," for evidence on the political volatility of the FLSA.

'Textiles and lumber were the two largest manufacturing employers in the South. According to the

1940  Census  508,902  workers  were employed  in the southern  textile  industry  and  249,366  were

employed  in sawmilling. Only three other southern manufacturing  industries (petroleum, chemicals,

and food  processing) employed over 100,000 people. Agriculture, the largest employer in the South,

was specifically  exempted from coverage under the minimum wage provisions of the FLSA.

percent  of the value of production.  Finally, the BLS and USDL  studies 7 and  Industry  Committee  Hearings were particularly  comprehensive  for these two industries, thus there is a considerable amount of data available.

The methodology employed in this article is closely akin to that used in recent  work by David  Card and Alan Krueger.  As an alternative to the 8 traditional  methodological  approaches, Card and Krueger use a "quasiexperimental" methodology based on comparisons of the effects of a minimum wage between a "treatment" group and a "control" group^  Tradi9 tional economic theory dictates that an increase in the minimum wage must have  a larger  effect  on  the  treatment  group than the control  group. The principal advantage to the quasi-experimental approach is that it is better able  than  traditional  approaches  to  measure  micro-level adjustments through mechanisms other than employment, hi addition to reduced employment  of unskilled  labor, an  effective  minimum  wage may result  in increased  employment  at  high-wage  firms,  reduced  non-wage  benefits received by low-wage employees, technological change, regional changes in the center of production, firms taking actions to evade or avoid coverage, or price increases to consumers.

Following studies by Katz and Krueger and by Card and Krueger, this article performs a quasi-experimental analysis of the seamless hosiery and lumber  industries using high-wage firms as the control  group  and  lowwage firms as the treatment group. 10 Because of the existence of large and persistent historical wage differences between the North and the South, this analytical approach will enable us to examine the regional impact of the

'Textbook analyses of the effects  of a minimum wage typically begin with the assumption of an industry for which all firms are assumed to be profit maximizers and to operate on the same production function  (see, for example, Ehrenberg and Smith, Modern Labor Economics, pp. 69-76). Firms will hire inputs such that the ratios of marginal revenue products equals the ratios of marginal factor costs. A minimum wage that is greater than  the prevailing wage for at least some workers will have two separate effects  that unambiguously reduce the employment of unskilled labor: a substitution  effect, whereby  other  factors  of  production  are substituted  for  low-wage  labor,  and  a production effect, whereby firms reduce output because of reduced product consumption. This approach provides the theoretical basis for the numerous time series and cross-sectional studies that analyze the effects  of a minimum wage by examining employment changes among demographic groups that are disproportionately composed  of unskilled workers (see Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen, "Effect";  Brown, "Minimum Wage Laws"; and Card and Krueger, Myth, for summaries). This literature has produced the much cited result that a  10 percent increase in the minimum wage results in a 1  to 3 percent decrease in teenage employment.

FLSA. 11 The data available for the hosiery industry permit  quasi-experimental analysis using firms that had to increase average wages in order to comply with the 1939 increase in the minimum rate as the treatment group and firms  that did not as the control group, hi the lumber industry additional testing is possible using small firms as the treatment group and large firms  as the control  group and also using intrastate firms as the control group and interstate firms as the treatment group.

As with natural science experiments, the control and treatment groups should  optimally  be  identical  in every  aspect  except  that  the  former  is affected  by the minimum wage, whereas the latter is not. In practice this condition can not be met because the nature of the FLSA required there to be systematic differences between firms that were affected  and those that were not. High-wage and low-wage firms were systematically  different across several dimensions and these differences  were likely to have been important in conditioning the response to the minimum wage. Where these differences  existed, their nature and likely impact on the process of adjustment to the minimum wage is noted.

## SEAMLESS HOSIERY

Textiles were the  South's most  important  manufacturing  industry. As was  the  case  with  much  southern  industry,  textiles,  particularly  cotton goods, specialized  in resource-intensive  low-wage manufacturing. 12 Because of the importance of the industry to the South, numerous  southern textile producers testified at the committee hearings on the FLSA prior to its initial passage in 1938 and amendment in 1947. Much of this testimony centered around the potentially dire consequences of the minimum wage. For example, cotton textile manufacturer  and Southern  States Industrial Council representative John Edgerton testified,  "The [FLSA] as a whole presents itself to us as a reincarnation of the NRA in a more virulent  form. As  far  as  southern  industry as a whole  is concerned,  the NRA  demonstrated itself to be a devastating experiment....  If the object of this bill is to prevent the migration of industry from  one area to another, especially from the North to the South, there is scarcely a doubt that the object would be obtained by the enactment of this law." 13

"in  1939 46.5 percent of southern workers earned less than S800.00 per year, the annual earnings of a full-time  minimum wage worker. This compares to 21.4 percent of northern  workers. Average annual earnings in the South  were S976.99, 69.4 percent of average earnings in the North. Seltzer, "Causes," p. 119.

FIGURE 1 HOURLY WAGES IN THE SEAMLESS HOSIERY INDUSTRY, 1938 AND 1940

<!-- image -->

Source: USDL, Seamless Hosiery Industry, p. 54.

It  is  against  this backdrop that this article examines the effects  of the FLSA on seamless hosiery, one of the largest branches of the textile industry in the South. The production of seamless hosiery was labor intensive prior to the establishment  of the minimum wage and was disproportionately located in the South. 14 The industry was highly competitive with only limited product differentiation,  high rates of entry and exit, and industry wide prices. 15 The FLSA instituted a $0.25 minimum rate on 24 October 1938, which was increased to $0,325 beginning  18 September  1939, in accordance with the recommendation of the Hosiery Industry Committee.

In  1941 the USDL published the results of a longitudinal survey of 97 firms  taken  in  1938 and  1940. 16 The published  data on wages, employment,  and  the production  process  can be used  as the basis  for  a quasiexperimental analysis of the effects of the minimum wage on the industry.

FIGURE  2

<!-- image -->

EARNINGS,  EMPLOYMENT,  AND MAN-HOURS IN THE  SEAMLESS HOSIERY INDUSTRY,  JANUARY  1938-AUGUST  1940

Source: USDL, Seamless Hosiery Industry, p. 37.

Six of these firms failed between  1938 and  1940 and four did not return fully useable surveys for both years. Of the remaining 87 firms, 33 paid an average hourly wage less than $0,325 in 1938 and are used as the treatment group in this analysis. The other 54 paid an average of at least $0,325 and are used as the control group. In the first eight months of 1938 hourly earnings for  the industry averaged  37.2 cents. This increased  3.8 percent  to 38.6 cents in 1939 and 13.9 percent to 42.4 cents in 1940. By comparison, average hourly earnings for all manufacturing  increased only 1.0 percent in 1939 and 2.4 percent in 1940. Figure 1  shows the distribution of wages in  1938  and  1940.  Given  that  nearly  one-third  of  the  1940  workforce earned between 32.5 and 35 cents, there can be little doubt that the 32.5 cent minimum was binding.

The USDL report provides monthly data on the level of employment and total man-hours worked in the industry between January 1938 and August 1940 at 88 identical firms. The National Association of Hosiery Manufacturers (NAHM) published employment data over the period based on reports  received  from  over  80 percent  of  the  firms  in the  industry. 17 The

"The data published by the NAHM includes estimates of employment in the remaining 20 percent of firms but the BLS report does not describe the procedure used for estimation.

TABLE 1 EMPLOYMENT AND AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS IN IDENTICAL SEAMLESS HOSIERY MILLS, 1938 AND 1940

| 1938 Average Hourly Earnings (dollars)   |   Firms 1938 |   Firms 1940 |   1938 Average Hourly Earnings (dollars) |   1940 Average Hourly Earnings (dollars) |   Percentage Change | 1938 Employees   | 1940 Employees   |   Percentage Change |
|------------------------------------------|--------------|--------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|
| &lt;  0.25                                  |           10 |            9 |                                    0.226 |                                    0.351 |               55.3  | 1,471            | 1,188            |              -19.2  |
| 0.25  -0.275                             |            8 |            8 |                                    0.265 |                                    0.373 |               40.8  | 1,680            | 1,594            |               -5.1  |
| 0.275-0.30                               |            9 |            9 |                                    0.291 |                                    0.385 |               32.3  | 1,424            | 1,176            |              -17.4  |
| 0.30  -0.325                             |            9 |            7 |                                    0.314 |                                    0.384 |               22.3  | 1,814            | 1,505            |              -17    |
| 0.325-0.35                               |           16 |           15 |                                    0.337 |                                    0.395 |               17.2  | 3,180            | 3,032            |               -4.7  |
| 0.35  -0.375                             |            4 |            4 |                                    0.367 |                                    0.402 |                9.5  | 1,528            | 1,555            |                1.8  |
| 0.375-0.40                               |           12 |           12 |                                    0.385 |                                    0.417 |                8.3  | 2,631            | 2,544            |               -3.3  |
| 0.40  -0.425                             |            5 |            4 |                                    0.41  |                                    0.429 |                4.6  | 642              | 570              |              -11.2  |
| 0.425-0.45                               |           15 |           14 |                                    0.436 |                                    0.484 |               11    | 1,971            | 2,233            |               13.3  |
| 0.45  -0.475                             |            4 |            4 |                                    0.459 |                                    0.492 |                7.2  | 1,214            | 1,194            |               -1.6  |
| &gt;  0.475                                 |            5 |            5 |                                    0.512 |                                    0.523 |                2.1  | 715              | 755              |                5.6  |
| &lt;  0.325                                 |           36 |           33 |                                    0.276 |                                    0.374 |               35.58 | 6,389            | 5,463            |              -16.95 |
| &gt;  0.325                                 |           61 |           58 |                                    0.395 |                                    0.437 |               10.65 | 11,881           | 11,883           |                0.02 |

Source: BLS, Seamless Hosiery Industry, p. 57.

NAHM data has the advantage of incorporating failed firms and new entrants, whereas the USDL data provides a more precise experimental  control. Figure 2 shows hourly earnings and indexes of employment and manhours over this period. The implementation of the FLSA clearly increased wages for the industry. It is also evident that a trend increase in employment was reversed after the implementation of the minimum rate in 1938 and a decrease in employment began shortly after the  1939 increase in the minimum rate. These patterns are even more apparent in the man-hours series, indicating that firms may have attempted to "spread the work" by reducing worker hours.

Although the changes in employment follow changes in wages, over the same period of time there was also an increase in product demand. Production of seamless hosiery increased  15.49 percent from  1,006,464,000 pairs in  1938 to  1,162,320,000 pairs in  1939 before  settling to  1,111,248,000 pairs  in  1940, still  10.41 percent above the  1938 level. 18 To test whether product demand or increasing wages explain the employment trends shown in  Figure  2,  we  have  performed  an  analysis  of  the  composition  of job losses.  Table  1 shows  the  distribution  of job  displacement  in  the  BLS sample categorized  by the  firms'  1938 average hourly wage. As can  be seen  in the  sixth column, wages increased  significantly  more rapidly in

treatment firms than in control firms. It is evident from the ninth column that the entire net job loss for the industry over the two year period was due to cutbacks in low-wage firms. Although there was a net loss of 924 jobs in the sample firms over the two year period, there was a net gain of two jobs at firms that payed an average wage of at least $0,325 per hour in 1938. The job losses were not uniformly distributed across regions. Virtually all of the low-wage plants in 1938 were located in the South, thus the region was more vulnerable to the minimum wage. In the BLS sample, southern employment decreased 5.5 percent from 13,868 to  12,689 over the two year period, whereas northern employment increased 4.9 percent from 4,437 to 4,657 over the same period.

The direct cause of the employment losses was the changing nature of the production process. In the late 1930s and early 1940s seamless hosiery was produced  in three distinct  manners: using hand transfer,  converted transfer,  and  fully  automatic  knitting  machines.  The  hand  transfer  and converted transfer processes used the same technology; a converted transfer knitting machine was simply a hand transfer machine with an attachment  to  enable  automated  production  for  certain  types  of  work. 19 This technology could be operated in a labor intensive manner, by using knitters on a hand transfer machine. It could also be operated in a capital intensive manner, by converting the machine to automate the knitting process. The technology  required  little  in the  way of human  capital.  Automatic  machines  were an alternative  production  technology that  required  entirely different  machinery and relied on skilled labor.

Although even prior to the passage of the FLSA there had been a general trend in the industry toward converting transfer machines and substituting automatic machines for transfer machines, this trend was accelerated with the implementation of the act. 20 As shown in Table 2, between  1938 and 1940 there was a 23.43 percent decrease in the number of hand  transfer machines, a 69.26 percent increase in converted transfer machines, and a 10.16 percent increase in automatic machines. Technological change did not occur uniformly throughout the industry, rather hand transfer machines were converted or retired and automatic machines were adopted at a faster rate  in  low-wage firms. As a result of mechanization  and  technological switching there were heavy  job losses amongst the operators of hand transfer knitting machines. Between  1938 and  1940, the number of knitters in the sample firms decreased by 786 from 4,489 to 3,703, fully  85 percent of the total employment decline. 21 Future job losses of this type were lim-

TABLE 2 MACHINERY USAGE IN 87 IDENTICAL SEAMLESS HOSIERY FIRMS, 1938 AND 1940

|                              |        | Average Firm Hourly Earnings in 1938   | Average Firm Hourly Earnings in 1938   |
|------------------------------|--------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Machine Type                 | Total  | &lt;$0.325                                | &gt;$0.325                                |
| 1938 Hand transfer machines  | 11,103 | 5,232                                  | 5,871                                  |
| 1940 Hand transfer  machines | 8,502  | 3,607  '                               | 4,895                                  |
| Percentage increase          | -23.43 | -31.06                                 | -16.62                                 |
| x 2                          |        | 75.280'                                | 75.280'                                |
| 1938 Converted  transfer     | 3,517  | 949                                    | 2,568                                  |
| machines                     |        |                                        |                                        |
| 1940 Converted  transfer     | 5,953  | 2,106                                  | 3,847                                  |
| machines                     |        |                                        |                                        |
| Percentage increase          | 69.26  | 121.92                                 | 49.81                                  |
| x 2                          |        | 212.886'                               | 212.886'                               |
| 1938 Automatic machines      | 18,921 | 3,914                                  | 15,007                                 |
| 1940 Automatic machines      | 20,844 | 5,037                                  | 15,807                                 |
| Percentage increase          | 10.16  | 28.69                                  | 5.33                                   |
| 2                            |        | 153.786'                               | 153.786'                               |

x

Notes: % 2 is the test statistic for a goodness of fit test on the null hypothesis that the number of machines in each class grew at an equal rate.

ited by the number of hand transfer machines that remained; by 1940 hand transfer machines only composed 33.6 percent of total machinery in lowwage plants.

Minimum  wage-induced  technological  switching  would  likely  have occurred even faster but for a war-related supply constraint. The tools and machinery used in producing automatic machines were easily converted to defence  use and were often  procured  for that purpose. 22 One method of circumventing this supply constraint was to use the available automated machinery more intensively. In 1940 50 percent of the automatic machines and  24 percent  of the converted transfer  machines were used on a three shift  basis.  Earl  Constantine,  President  of  the  National  Association  of Hosiery Manufacturers, testified that the FLSA resulted in increased use of  the  "graveyard  shift." 23 Although  no  data  on  three  shift  usage  were compiled prior to 1940, the claim is intuitively compelling. If it is assumed that  workers  have  a "taste" for avoiding the graveyard  shift,  employers would have to pay a compensating wage premium to work the shift under competitive labor market conditions. Thus the graveyard shift would cost more  to  run  than  other  shifts.  However,  the  FLSA  increased  the  wage above the  competitive  rate and created  an excess  supply of labor.  As a result, firms  might not have needed to pay a graveyard premium and all

three shifts could have been staffed by minimum wage workers at the same cost to the firm. 24

Although the short- to medium-term effects of the FLSA on employment in the seamless hosiery industry in the South were important but limited, there may have been a more important long-term effect.  By increasing the cost of domestic production, the FLSA may have made foreign  imports more competitive. The evidence is limited, but suggests that imports increased dramatically after the implementation of the FLSA, particularly of low-cost products produced by unskilled labor. In  1940 total imports increased 26.7 percent from  1939 levels despite the fact that imports from Japan (which had accounted for 65.6 percent of all imports in 1939) fell by 55.9  percent.  Imports  from  China  increased  by  166.2  percent  during 1939/40. 25 Although the market share of imports was still less than 4 percent, it was concentrated in the low-cost products in which the South specialized. 26 However,  under  any  reasonable  counterfactual assumptions about wages in the absence of the FLSA, it seems implausible that southern  labor  costs  could  have competed with Asia in the longer term. The southern  seamless hosiery industry was clearly helped more by military purchases and high rates of protection (duties were 50 percent of the value of the product) than it was hurt by minimum wages. 27

## LUMBER AND SAWMILLING

Lumber was the South's second largest manufacturing employer. Opponents  of minimum  wage  legislation had  long argued  that the  minimum wage tends to become the maximum wage and few stressed this possibility as strongly as the representatives of southern lumber. 28 The FLSA established a $0.25 minimum rate for the lumber industry in October 1938. This was increased  to  $0.30  in  October  1939 and  $0.35  in November  1941. Figures  3  and  4  show  the  distribution  of  entry-level  wages  at  covered northern  and  southern  lumber  firms  with  at least  21  employees  in  July

Ibid., pp. 81,84.

^An example of this can be found from the testimony at the Hearings on the FLSA: "A flat minimum

price means paying a sorry slow-moving, devil-may-care, good-for-nothing  specimen as much as a

good man that is worth two to five times as much anywhere-anytime."  Letter from the Slater Lumber

Co., Inc. to Representative G. A. Barden (D, NC) in Senate Committee on Education and Labor and

House Committee on Labor,

Joint Hearings,

p. 1218.

FIGURE 3

<!-- image -->

Hourly  wage  (cents)

ENTRY WAGES OF UNSKILLED LABOR IN THE LUMBER INDUSTRY, 1938

Sources: BLS, "Entrance Wage Rates" and "Hourly Earnings."

1938 and July  1939. It is evident that the worst fears of southern lumbermen had come to pass, hi  1938 wages were approximately normally distributed, but a year later there is strong evidence of heaping in the distribution-70.5  percent  of southern workers  earned  exactly the  minimum rate, hi July  1940 94.3 percent earned exactly the $0.30 minimum rate. It is doubtful  that the FLSA had as large an effect  on the wages of any other industry. Over the same period the wage structure of the northern lumber industry  was  affected  little  by the FLSA,  and  thus  it  provides  an  ideal experimental control. Between July 1938 and July 1939, the average entrylevel wage in southern lumber increased 5.19 percent; between July 1939 and July 1940, 16.52 percent; and between July 1941 and July  1942,16.32 percent. For northern lumber these figures were -2.79 percent, 0.94 percent, and 3.36 percent. Little wonder that the Southern Pine Association had considered the FLSA to be "by far the most important question  facing our industry" and had spearheaded opposition to the bill. 29

Standard economic theory dictates that such an effective minimum wage must have either created unemployment or otherwise altered the structure of the labor market. Although firm-level data similar to that for the hosiery

Figure 4 ENTRY WAGES OF UNSKILLED LABOR IN THE LUMBER INDUSTRY, 1939

<!-- image -->

Sources: BLS, "Entrance Wage Rates" and "Hourly Earnings."

industry  are  unavailable,  BLS  time  series  data  on  layoffs and  net accessions be used to examine employment trends in the lumber industry. The data consist of monthly turnover and net accession rates for the lumber industry  nationally,  but  do  not  separate  the  two  production  regions.  It would be expected that ceteris paribus the FLSA would result  in a decrease  in  employment  nationally;  employment  losses  in  the  low-wage, labor-intensive South would outweigh employment gains in the remainder of the country. 30 Southern lumber had long been a high turnover industry and thus any employment disruptions would likely have occurred almost immediately after  the implementation of the minimum wage. 31 Figure 5 shows an index of employment for the industry between  1930 and 1942, constructed  by setting the value for  January  1930 to  100 and  thereafter

FIGURE 5 EMPLOYMENT INDEX FOR THE LUMBER INDUSTRY, 1930- 1942

<!-- image -->

Sources: BLS, "Labor Turn-Over in Manufacturing" and "Review."

adjusting by net accessions (new hires minus separations) per 100 employees. There were slight decreases in the index following the establishment and increases of the minimum wage, however, these were small relative to decreases due to downturns in the business cycle.

Structural breaks in the relative net accession rate, defined as the  difference  between  the net  accession  rate in the  lumber  industry and  the net accession rate in all industries, provide an alternative test for  employment effects. Because the relative net accession rate adjusts for the net accession rate  for  all  industries,  its  variation  will  be  driven  predominantly  by industry-specific  factors,  rather than the business  cycle. Every possible seasonal and non-seasonal ARM  A model up to (p,d,q) = (4,1,4) was estimated using the data prior to October  1938 and the Akaike  Information Criterion  was  used  to  select  the  appropriate  model-ARIMA  (0,1,0) (2,0,2). 32 The forecasts from this model from October 1938 through December  1942 were then used as a counterfactual  estimate of employment levels had there been no minimum wage. The estimated counterfactual,  shown in Figure 6, follows a pattern similar to the actual relative net accession rate,

32 See Mills, Time Series, pp. 104-15,138 on the ARIMA model and the Akaike Information Criterion.

FIGURE 6 ACTUAL AND FORECASTED NET ACCESSION RATES IN THE LUMBER INDUSTRY, OCTOBER 1938-DECEMBER  1942

<!-- image -->

Sources: BLS, "Labor Tum-Over" and "Review."

suggesting that the minimum wage did not bring about a structural change in employment practices.

As with the hosiery industry, it is possible to analyze the nature of adjustment to the FLSA by examining demand conditions and the nature of the production process. During the period of this study, war-related government purchases caused an increase in lumber demand. By  1942  approximately 59.87 percent of total lumber output was consumed by military, naval, and industrial construction. Because of the exogenous increase in demand, total production  of  softwoods  increased  29.3  percent  and  total  production  of hardwoods increased 41.7 percent from 1939 levels. The aggregate increase, however,  conceals changes  in the regional  share of production.  Between 1939 and  1942 total southern production of softwoods  increased by  17.9 percent compared to 28.2 percent for the rest of the nation. Changes in hardwood production  followed  a similar pattern;  in the  South production  increased 31.6 percent, in the rest of the nation, 52.4 percent. 33 The fact that national employment in the industry increased by only 9.52 percent over the same period of time suggests that the FLSA did have a negative effect  on southern lumber employment. 34

The lumber production process differed  significantly  in the two regions. Northern lumbering, which was concentrated on the Pacific coast and in the upper Midwest, was highly capital and skilled labor intensive. By contrast,

"All figures from USDL, Economic Factors, p. 15.

^This is based on the annual averages of the employment index created from the net accession data in BLS, "Labor Turn-Over" and "Review."

southern  lumbering was highly dependent upon unskilled  labor, much of which was seasonal. 35 Lumber manufacturing  involved a weight reduction process, and thus minimization of transportation costs required that processing be located near its source. Unlike in the West, large, first-growth forests had  been  depleted  in  the  South,  thus  the  industry  increasingly  relied  on scattered plantations of second or third-growth timber and narrow diameter trees. 36 As a result, southern lumber, which had always been atomized and highly competitive, became more so during the period of this study. The growing importance of the small mill is demonstrated by figures showing that mills sawing fewer than  1000 board-feet  cut one-third of the  South's lumber output in 1944, compared to 27 percent in 1942 and only 3 percent in the West. 37 Increased atomization reduced southern lumber firms' ability to  substitute capital for  labor. Toward the end of the period of this study, two technological changes emerged as a result of changes in the resource base: the portable sawmill and the replacement of railroads by trucks as the primary means of transporting lumber products. These changes, however, did not increase the capital to labor ratio for the industry; on the contrary, they were more labor-intensive  than the technologies they replaced.  BLS statistics show that man-hour requirements to produce 1000 board feet in the South increased from 30.7 to 41.2 from 1935 to 1946. 38

The employment effects  of the FLSA would probably have been larger had not many southern firms continued to pay less than the minimum rate. C.  C.  Sheppard testified  on the issue of evasion: "While  law abiding and honest employers and industries struggle to operate legally, the less scrupulous  will  profit." 39 The decision by individual firms to evade the  law by paying lower rates can be analyzed using Gary Becker's framework of rational criminal behavior. 40 If it is assumed that violations involved paying the prevailing wage (W') rather than the minimum wage (WMIN), the expected benefits  to violating the law (B) can be expressed as: B = N(WMW -  W*) Pr(I)F, where N is the number of workers involved, Pr{I) is the probability

35 According to C. C. Sheppard, Louisiana lumber manufacturer and Chairman of the Southern Pine Industry Association, production of 1,000 feet of lumber in 1944 required  11.1 man-hours in the West, 13.8 man-hours in the North, and 29.9 man-hours in the South. See U.S. House Committee on Education and Labor, Hearings, p. 220-21  and USDL, Economic Factors, p.  190. According to the U.S. Bureau  of the Census, Census, labor costs accounted  for 32.4 percent of total costs for the lumber industry nationally and 41.5 percent of total cost in the southern hardwood industry.

36 See BLS, "Labor Requirements," p. 942. Although timber growth was increasingly scattered, the South  was not  facing  a shortage of raw  materials. Walter Kellogg, representative  of the  Southern Hardwood Industry Association, testified that 60 percent of the south was undeveloped and half of this area  had  tree growth.  Wilson  Compton,  Secretary and  General  Manager of the National  Lumber Manufacturing Association testified that "fundamental  resources are not declining." Industry Committee 30, the Lumber Industry [hereafter  IC30], Digest of Transcript, pp. 3, 26.

"BLS, "Labor Requirements," p. 942.

38

39

Ibid., p. 941. These statistics differ  from Sheppard's because of different  levels of processing.

U.S. House Committee on Education and Labor,

Hearings,

p. 215.

''"Becker, "Crime."

of being inspected, and F is the fine imposed if caught. Based on this relationship, one would predict that the southern lumber industry would have had higher rates of evasion because low prevailing wages in the industry would have made the value {WMm -  W*) large and because the atomized nature of the industry made inspections more costly and thus less frequent.

A considerable amount of descriptive evidence in support of this theory can be found  in the testimony at the hearings of the Lumber and Timber Products Industry Committee. For example, Kentucky Lumber Manufacturer J. Norman testified that based on the experience of the NRA Lumber Industry Code, enforcing the FLSA would be "like trying to enforce the Prohibition Law. The small isolated mills [would] not be reached and [would begin] to absorb more of the market." 41 Wilson Compton testified:

[T]housands of units are [paying less than] the prescribed minimum. Lumber products are hard to find. Many plants are in local communities where local sentiment resents and resists minimum wages, while others deny liability under the Act and defy  efforts  to enforce  either minimum wages or limitation of working hours prescribed by Federal law. The industry is a "difficult"  industry. 42

Data on plant inspections and violations by industry collected by the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Division of the Department of Labor can be used to provide a more  systematic test of the hypothesis. Table 3 shows coverage, inspections, and discovered violations of the minimum wage and child  labor provisions  of the FLSA. 43 It is evident  that  inspections  were significantly  less frequent  and violations were significantly more  frequent in the lumber industry, particularly sawmilling, than in other industries. 44 The result is especially convincing because the data are aggregated across region. The northern branch of the industry was highly concentrated and relied on high-wage labor, and thus was easy to inspect and had little incentive to pay less than the minimum rate.

It was perhaps even more common for firms to legally avoid coverage by selling solely through intrastate commerce in order to take advantage of the exemption to the act. 45 Sheppard noted in his testimony to Congress, "Prior to the enactment of the wage-hour law, operators distributed their products

41 IC30, Digest of Transcript, p. 35.

43 The USDL, Report, lumps violations of the child labor and minimum wage provisions of the act together. For this to invalidate the conclusions of this analysis, it would have to be the case that the proportion of violations that involved the child labor provisions of the act were considerably higher in lumber than in other industries. This seems highly unlikely given the physical strength required in many lumberingjobs.

44 The sample of inspected firms shown in Table 3 was not random, 28 percent were chosen because of complaints. However, this problem was not unique to the lumber industry.

45 Firms could also avoid coverage by reducing their labor force to five or fewer workers. However, there is no testimony from the Industry  Committee or Congressional  hearings to suggest  that this occurred prior to 1946.

TABLE 3 INSPECTIONS AND VIOLATIONS OF THE FLSA BY COVERED FIRMS IN 1946

|                                | All Firms   | Lumber   | Sawmilling   |
|--------------------------------|-------------|----------|--------------|
| Number covered by the FLSA     | 557,030     | 36,950   | 31,670       |
| Number inspected in 1946       | 43,832      | 2,538    | 1,356        |
| Percentage inspected           | 7.87        | 6.87     | 4.28         |
| Number in violation of FLSA    | 6,798       | 583      | 364          |
| Percentage of inspected  firms | 15.51       | 22.97    | 26.84        |
| /-statistic (inspections)      |             | 1.945'   | 4.963"       |
| /-statistic (violations)       |             | 5.022"   | 6.011"       |

wherever a market existed or could be created within their own state as well as across state boarders. With the enactment of the law, many confined their purchases and sales to their own States in order to avoid the responsibility of  complying  with the law and as a result of economic inability to comply." 46 Perhaps the best indicator of the pervasiveness of this phenomenon is the fact that in 1938, 300 of 500 Texas sawmills participated in interstate commerce, but by 1941 only 20 continued to do so. 47

Within a year after the implementation of the FLSA there were marked differences  between  the  wage structures  of firms  that  were  covered  and those  that  were  not.  The  extent  of  these  differences  can  be  seen  from  a 1939/40 BLS survey of 382 small lumber firms (those with fewer than 20 employees),  taken  as  a  supplement  to  their  1939/40  survey  of  wages  in larger firms. The average wage in small southern firms was 25.9 cents and 45.7 percent of their workforce earned less than the 30 cent minimum. By comparison, the average hourly wage for larger southern firms was 30.19 cents, just  above  the  30 cent minimum rate. Large northern  and  western firms paid an average of 55.0 cents; small northern firms, 36.0 cents; and small western firms, 64.0 cents. Only 14.5 percent of the workforce in small northern  firms  and 0 percent  in small western firms  earned  less than  the minimum wage. 48 These figures may understate the actual difference in entry level  wages  between  covered  and uncovered  firms.  The BLS sample  includes skilled workers in small firms, who received wages above the minimum rate. It also includes small firms that were engaged in interstate commerce, and thus were covered under the FLSA. Virginia lumber manufac-

turer Victor Stewart testified  that intrastate plants in Virginia paid average hourly wages of between 20 and 28 cents. 49 According to the  1940 U.S. census, Virginia had the highest overall wages of any state from the former Confederacy, thus it is likely that large numbers of southern lumber workers earned hourly rates of less than 20 cents. 50

Avoidance of the law resulted in X-inefficiency.  Sheppard stated that the intrastate exemption "limits free competition. It is not a natural limitation, [rather it] is artificial, uselessly imposed by a law which professes to eliminate unfair  competition." 51 Compton reported that "Few sawmills  [could] find  markets for all their diversified  grades within the state." As a consequence, "[Firms could not practically] confine themselves to intrastate business and in the interest of forest conservation, not to speak of the interest of maintaining fair labor standards, they should not be encouraged to do so." 52 Avoidance of the law resulted in unsound conservation practices and lower levels of efficiency  for two reasons. Firstly, the inability to find  intrastate markets for all timber products resulted in increased wastage and thus lower output per unit of land. Secondly, large integrated lumber corporations had a longer time horizon and were more likely to own and optimally manage timber land than were smaller firms.

Another consequence of widespread avoidance was a segmented product market. Sheppard testified  that "interstate producers are at a disadvantage in competing with the low-wage intrastate producers." 53 A number of larger firms  vertically disintegrated  to take advantage of exemptions to the act. Irving Richter, Associate Economist at the Wage and Hour Division, testified that many small intrastate mills were subsidiaries or exclusive contractors of larger firms that maintained an interstate business. 54 Those firms that did not withdraw completely to intrastate commerce became  increasingly reliant on the interstate market. Wilfred  Edens testified  that between  1936 and 1938 only 7 percent of his company's output was sold interstate, but by 1941 this figure was over 40 percent. 55

## CONCLUSIONS

This article has examined the effects  of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 on the southern seamless hosiery and lumber industries. Rather than the typical comparative static approach of estimating a short-run elasticity of demand, the method of analysis is quasi-experimental comparisons be-

49 IC30, Digest of Transcript, p. 24.

- SO U. S. Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth Census.
- 5i House Committee on Education and Labor, Hearings, p. 222.
- 52 IC30, Digest of Transcript, pp. 3, 10.
- 53 House Committee on Education and Labor, Hearings, p. 222-23.
- ^ O O , Digest of Transcript, p. 6.
- "Ibid., p. 1.

tween firms for which the minimum wage was binding and firms for which it was not. The approach has several advantages over traditional analytical methods, most notably it is better able to measure adjustment  on margins other than reduced employment among specific groups of workers.

Unlike recent work by Card and Krueger, this article concludes that the minimum wage did have an effect on low-wage firms' employment policies and production processes, hi both industries the wages of a large proportion of the workforce had to be increased in order to bring firms into compliance with the FLSA. In 1940 approximately one-third of workers in the seamless hosiery industry earned no more than 2.5 cents over the 32.5 cent minimum rate. Heaping of the wage distribution at the minimum rate was even more prevalent in the lumber industry; in 1940 nearly 95 percent of the workforce earned exactly the 30 cent minimum. However, the manner in which the two industries adjusted  to the changes in wage structure differed  dramatically. In  seamless hosiery there was increased mechanization; old  hand-transfer machinery was retired or converted and automatic machinery was increasingly adopted or run on a three-shift basis. There was also reduced employment in low-wage plants, particularly for knitters. Finally, employment in the comparatively high-wage North increased whereas employment in the South  decreased.  The  employment  effects  on  the  lumber  industry  were surprisingly small; employment in the industry actually increased after  the implementation of the minimum wage, although by a considerably smaller percentage than product demand over the same period. War-related government purchases increased production in both the North and South, however, there was a substantial decline in the South's share of total lumber output following the passage of the act. Employment in the southern lumber industry  would  likely  have  been  more adversely  affected  but  for  two  factors. Firstly, changes in the resource base forced  the industry to become more labor  intensive. Secondly, the majority  of firms avoided paying the minimum wage either by withdrawing from interstate commerce to take advantage of an exemption to the act or by illegally paying less than the minimum rate.

## REFERENCES

Becker,  Gary.  "Crime  and  Punishment:  An  Economic  Approach." Journal  of  Political Economy 76, no.  1  (1968):  169-217.

Brown,  Charles.  "Minimum  Wage Laws: Are  They Overrated?" Journal  of  Economic Perspectives  2, no. 3 (1988): 133-47.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature 20, no. 2 (1982): 487-528.

Card, David, and Alan B. Kiueger, "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania." The American  Economic Review 84, no. 4 (1994): 772-93.

. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Robert S. Smith, Modern Labor Economics. 2d ed.  Glenview, EL: Scott, Foresman and Company, 1985.

Industry Committee No. 21, the Seamless Hosiery Industry. Digest of Transcript, Hearing of the Committee. National Archives Record Group  155, Entry  16, Box 73, 1941.

Industry Committee No. 30, the Lumber Industry. Digest of  Transcript,  Hearing  of the Committee. National Archives Record Group  155, Entry  16, Box 85, 1941.

Katz, Lawrence, and Alan B. Krueger. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast Food Industry." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46, no.  1  (1992): 6-21.

Kennan, John. "The Elusive Effects of Minimum Wages." Journal of Economic Literature 33, no. 4 (1995): 1949-65.

Mills, Terence. Time Series Techniques  for  Economists. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  1990.

Seltzer, Andrew J. "Causes and Consequences of American Minimum Wage Legislation, 1911-1946." Ph.D.  diss., University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign,  1994.

.  "The Political  Economy of the Fair Labor  Standards Act of  1938." Journal  of

Political Economy 103, no. 6 (1995):  1302-44.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Manufacturers. Washington, DC: GPO, 1939.

. Sixteenth Census of the United States. Washington, DC: GPO, 1940.

U.S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  (BLS).  "Entrance  Wage  Rates  of  Common  Labor," Monthly Review. Washington, DC: GPO, various issues.

. "Labor Turn-Over in Manufacturing." Monthly Review. Washington, DC: GPO, various issues.

. "A Review of Factory Labor Turn-Over,  1930 to 1936." Monthly Review. Washington, DC: GPO, 1937: 154-75.

. "Hourly Earnings in the Lumber and Timber Products Industry." Monthly Review. Washington, DC: GPO, 1941: 187-208.

\_. "Labor Requirements  in  Southern  Pine Lumber Production." Monthly Review. Washington, DC: GPO,  1946:941-53.

- U.S.  Department  of  Labor  (USDL),  Wage  and  Hour  Division. The Seamless  Hosiery Industry. Washington, DC: GPO, 1941.

. Economic Factors Bearing on the Establishment of Minimum Wages in the Logging, Lumber and Timber and Related Products Industries. Washington, DC: GPO, 1943.

.

Report: 1946 and 1947, Washington, DC: GPO, 1947.

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Education and Labor. Hearings: Minimum Wage Standards. 80th Cong.,  1st sess., Washington, DC: GPO, 1947.

U.S. Senate Committee on Education and Labor and U. S. House Committee on Labor. Joint Hearings on the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1937. 75th Cong., 1st sess., Washington, DC: GPO, 1937.

Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South, Revolutions in the Southern Economy  Since the Civil War. New York: Basic Books, 1986.