## COMMENTARY

.

## The Links Between Industrial, Community, and Ecological Sustainability: A Forestry Case Study

Aleck Ostry

Department of Health Care and Epidemiology and Center for Health Services and Policy Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

## ABSTRACT

According to Harold Innis, Canada's economic history has been based on the discovery of natural resources, consequent  community  formation  to  facilitate  their  extraction, resource depletion, and finally, community disappearance. This model links industrial change and development in the resource sector with both community and ecological outcomes  but  neglects  detailed  exploration  of  the  industry/ ecosystem linkage. The purpose of this paper is to adapt the ecological footprint concept in order to make the ecological impact of economic and technological change in a Canadian  resource  industry  (sawmilling)  explicit.  This  investigation utilizes a large cohort of sawmill workers gathered in 14 British Columbia (B.C.) mills, a study that measured the ecological footprint in several of these mills, and a labor adjustment study conducted by Statistics Canada to  explore  the  links  between  technological  change  and downsizing in this resource industry and both community .

and ecological sustainability. The ecological footprint concept is adapted for use in a resource-extracting industry. This allows moving the estimation of the ecological footprint from its usual place, an urban consuming population, to the site of natural capital transformation (the sawmill) thereby linking the costs and benefits of this transformation with site or region-specific ecosystem exploitation. Results  demonstrate  that  the  recession  of  the  early  1980s eliminated over 40% of the sawmill workforce and stimulated  increased  replacement  of  labor  by  capital,  thus  increasing productivity and the ecological footprint of sawmills. The new technical infrastructure now in place in most sawmills is accelerating the pace of forest ecosystem drawdown  while  at  the  same  time  producing  less  economic benefit for the local community. Adaptation of the ecological  footprint  for  use  at  the  site  of  the  transformation  of natural capital makes these trade-offs more specific.

## INTRODUCTION

According to Rapport (1998a,b), 'healthy ecosystems are characterized by their capability to sustain healthy human populations.' The fishing to extinction  of  Canada's  east  coast  cod  and  the attendant  collapse  of  outport  communities  is  a graphic illustration of the dependence of human populations on the health of ecosystems. Such a link is most visible and immediate in communities directly dependent on the extraction and primary

Address correspondence to: Dr. Aleck Ostry, Department of Health Care and Epidemiology, 5804 Fairview Avenue, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6T 1Z3; E-mail Ostry@unixg.ubc.ca.

processing of the natural products of local ecosystems. Canada is unique among western industrialized  countries  in  having  large  numbers  of  communities involved in direct exploitation of nature.

According to Harold Innes, much of Canada's economic history has been based on the discovery of  natural  resources,  consequent  community  formation to facilitate their extraction, resource depletion, and finally community disappearance (Hayter &amp; Barnes 1990). The historical pattern of this Innesian  'cycle  of  destruction'  has  been  well  documented  from  the  fur  trade  in  the  16th  century through  to  the  Newfoundland  cod  fishery  in  our own century.

The strength of Innes's model is that it links industrial  change  and  development  in  the  resource sector with both community and ecological  outcomes.  However,  the  model's  focus  is  on the economic history of industry/community interactions rather than on industry/ecosystems interactions.  Ecologists  have  increasingly  become concerned about the linkage between ecosystem health and the health of economies. According to Rapport  (1995),  'healthy  ecosystems  must  not only be ecologically sound, but must also be economically viable and  able to sustain human healthy communities.'

The purpose of this article is to explore the linkage between ecosystems and economy by developing and using an adapted form of the ecological footprint tool to make explicit the ecological impact of economic and technological change in  a  Canadian  resource  industry  (sawmilling). This  article  also  develops  the  industry/community component of the Innis model.

## BACKGROUND

The forest ecosystems that sustain British Columbia's (B.C.) forest products industry, including sawmilling, are under increasing pressure. In B.C., for example,  '50%  of  all  the  public  timber  cut  has been felled in the last 13 years. The most rapid acceleration has primarily been in the B.C. interior, with 50% of the total cut being done since 1977. The northern regions of Prince George and Prince Rupert  have  an  even  faster  acceleration  rate' (Travers 1993). In addition, 'much of this acceleration has been above the Ministry of Forest's own estimates of the sustainable yield' (Travers 1993).

At the same time, employment in forest-based manufacturing in most towns has shrunk to record post-war lows. The increased rate of natural capital depletion using a smaller industrial workforce has been made possible because of the dramatic technological  changes  that  began  in  the  forest  products  manufacturing  sector,  including  sawmilling and the pulp and paper industry, in the late 1970s and  early  1980s.  Large  segments  of  the  industry had, by the early 1980s, moved from 'Fordist' assembly line mass production methods to 'flexible' methods  of  production  and  work  organization. This was made possible largely by a combination of new  markets  and  new  computerized  production technology (Barnes &amp; Hayter 1995).

The increasing rate of tree consumption combined with a diminishing labor force poses a twin sustainability challenge. On the one hand, forestry-

based  communities  receive  less  revenue  in  the form of direct wages and municipal taxes from local mills (Regional Data Corporation 1994). If there is no  economic  diversification  within  the  affected community the economic base is reduced shrinking the  local  labor  market  and  increasing  pressureparticularly in single industry mill towns-on workers to leave the community in order to find work in other  cities.  Shrinking  local  revenues  and  downward pressure jobs both act to reduce community sustainability.  At  the  same  time,  sawmills,  made more  efficient  by  recent  technological  enhancement,  increase  pressure  on  the  ecosystems  from which logs are extracted which may act to reduce ecological sustainability.

From a traditional economic perspective such a  scenario  may  be  acceptable  because  greater throughput of raw logs and more efficient technology  in  mills  means  greater  productivity  and short-term wealth generation. Viewed through a sustainability lens, however, increased productivity  in  sawmills  could  lead  to  increased  pressures on forests, permanent job loss, and reduced community viability. From the ecosystem and community  perspective,  enhanced  industrial  productivity  is  desirable  only  if  it  leads  to  lower  resource throughput.

In this investigation, the changing ecological footprint of several major sawmills in the province is  examined.  The  ecological  footprint  is  an  estimate  of  a  specific  population's  consumption  of major resources measured in terms of the amount of land in continuous production that is necessary to sustain the group's rate of consumption (Wackernagel &amp; Rees 1996). In this study an attempt has been  made  to  adapt  the  concept  to  a  resourceextracting industry. Accordingly, the sawmill, rather than a population group, is the unit of consumption, and because turning trees into lumber is a relatively  crude  primary  manufacturing  process, most of the footprint can be assessed directly by measuring lumber production.

However,  it  should  be  emphasized  that  this approach will result in a conservative estimation of the 'true' ecological footprint of a sawmill because mill lumber production is an underestimate both for the number of trees consumed each year and the total energy required by a mill to convert trees  to  lumber.  The  ecological  footprint  estimated on the basis of lumber production alone does not include the wastage involved in converting trees to lumber, the energy required for logging the trees, building logging roads and other infrastructure, and the energy required to oper-

ate the sawmills. This calculation also does not include the size of the land base required for a constant flow of trees to a sawmill, which will depend on factors such as logging intensity, general forestry, and silviculture policies and will expand as accessible stands of this largely nonrenewable resource are logged off.

This analysis is based on a database of approximately 26,000 B.C. sawmill workers, gathered to investigate the occupational effects of antifungal chemicals,  in  combination  with  sawmill  production data gathered during this time (Hertzman et al. 1997). The job history information in the database  was  used  to  determine  changing  employment patterns in these mills. For mills located in forestry-dependent  communities,  changing  employment opportunities have direct effects on the economic sustainability of the community. Thus, employment change can be linked with community  sustainability.  In  addition,  using  a  survey  of employed and laid off forest industry workers during the period 1978-1985, the economic impact on the community of technological restructuring in sawmills was estimated (Cohen &amp; Allen 1988). Finally,  a  study  was  conducted  to  determine  the ecological footprint for these mills.

The  time  period  for  this  study  covers  the years 1950-1985 as this is the time frame of original cohort study. However, the focus of this investigation is on the years between 1978 and 1985 because this is when the largest recession and major industrial  restructuring  took  place.  It  should  be noted that the technological revolution in the industry  has  continued  and  the  results  shown  for the time period under investigation may underestimate current effects. For example, according to Marchak (Marchak 1995), 'in gross terms 966 cubic metres per year of timber supported a job in 1980,  but  1,300  cubic  metres  per  year  was  required  in  1993.  In  the  major  employment  area, sawmilling  and  plywood  production,  48%  more timber is required to support a job in 1993 than in  1980,  including  jobs  in  management,  plants, production, transportation, and infrastructure.'

## THE EMPIRICAL BASE

The empirical basis for this investigation consists of a cohort of sawmill workers, a study that measured  the  ecological  footprint  of  several  of  these mills, and a forestry-worker labor adjustment study conducted  by  Statistics  Canada  (Cohen  &amp;  Allen 1988).

## SAWMILL WORKERS' COHORT

The cohort was gathered between 1987 and 1992 in order to investigate the effects of an antifungal chemical, chlorophenol, on sawmill worker health. It  consists of 26,487 men who worked for at least one year between 1950 and 1985, in at least one of 14  large  sawmills  located  in  four  regions  of  the province: the Lower Mainland, the Interior, Vancouver  Island,  and  the  Southern  B.C.  Mainland Coast.  Complete  information  on  job  history  was available in 11 of the study mills for the time period  1950-1985,  so  that  temporal  and  regional changes in employment could be tracked. Because three  of  the  mills  were  not  built  until  the  1960s, data for early time periods are missing.

## FOREST SECTOR LABOUR ADJUSTMENT STUDY

Produced in 1988 for Employment and Immigration Canada, this longitudinal study linked Statistics  Canada  and  Revenue  Canada  files  for  the years  1978  to  1985  in  order  to  study  income changes  among  Canadian  forestry  workers  (Cohen &amp; Allen 1988). Data was individually linked but is presented in grouped form for confidentiality  reasons.  Income  data  for  workers  and  their spouses  and  unemployment  data  for  workers  in the  B.C.  sawmill  workforce  are  available  for  the period 1978-1985. This is convenient as this time frame straddles the major restructuring period in the industry and overlaps with the last few years of the sawmill workers' cohort study. By linking the cohort study data with the economic study, demographic  changes  occurring  between  1978  and 1985 were translated into likely economic impacts for sawmill workers and their families at the community level.

## LABOR DEMOGRAPHY FOR THE COHORT

Three mills built in the 1960s were excluded from the  initial  analysis;  the  remaining  11  study  mills reflect the demographic reality of the larger, established  sawmills  for  the  entire  time  period  of 1950-1985.

Figure  1  shows  that  in  all  11  mills  employment  grew  by  approximately  30%  during  the boom in the 1960s, peaking in 1973. From 19731979, employment remained high and fairly stable,  but  from  1979-1985,  employment  dropped by about 40%. In exact terms, employment in the 11 mills dropped from 8,457 to 4,896 workers, a

Total number of Workers in 11 Study Mills by YearFIGURE 1. Total number of workers in eleven study mills by year.

<!-- image -->

total  of  3,561.  In  1982  alone,  1,078  workers  lost their jobs. Based on patterns of employment loss, the post-1979 period appears unique.

Of the 3,561 workers who lost their jobs between 1979 and 1985, 2,232 were actively terminated and 1,329 retired or were retired. In a labor market where layoffs usually proceed in terms of strict  seniority,  one  would  expect  younger  workers to bear the brunt of employment layoffs. The extent  to  which  older  workers  were  affected  by employment downturns depended on the degree to which mills adopted policies of encouraged or forced early retirement. These data indicate that, during  the  recession  of  the  early  1980s,  about one-third  of  workers  were  let  go  through  both normal and possibly early retirements.

In fact,  however, most job losses were active terminations, meaning  that  the  downturn  affected mainly the younger segment of the workforce. Because community viability is directly related to the ability of younger workers to obtain local employment, the age-specific changes in termination profile across time periods and regions are informative. Figure 2 shows the change in the rate of active terminations for the sawmill cohort from  1955-1985.  Layoffs  are  considered  active terminations,  while  terminations  due  to  illness, disability,  or  retirement  are  not.  Active  terminations  are  emphasized  because  these  are  more likely to reflect the size of the real 'bite' of economic change in the workforce.

Using a life-table approach, age-specific person-years  of  employment  were  constructed  with active termination rates for three time periods between 1950 and 1985. In order to compare active termination rates of older workers with younger workers,  the  number  of  person-years  of  employment were standardized for mortality using 19811985 cohort mortality rates.  In  this  way,  the  impact of mortality on person-years of employment is removed allowing for a more effective comparison  of  active  termination  rates  between  young and old workers.

In Figure 2, active termination rates are modeled over time by showing the decline in the number of person-years worked for 10 age groups in three different time periods. Active terminations reduced the person-years worked in 1981-1985 by 20% compared to 1961-1965. Seventy-eight percent of these lost person-years were within the age groups  15-35,  with  particularly  hard  losses  for those under the age of 25. Again, this is not surprising given that the order of layoffs is strictly seniority-based and the absolute number of jobs lost was very high.

These  data  indicate  that  employment  losses following the recession of 1981 were more drastic than  for  any  other  recessionary  era  after  1950. And workers under the age of 35 appear to have been most affected. It is likely that job losses among young workers will have more impact on community viability, particularly in forestry-dependent

## Comparison of Person-Years Worked by Age Group for Three Time Periods Standardized to 1981-85 Mortality Rates

FIGURE 2. Comparison of person-years worked by age for three time periods standardized to 1981-1985 mortality rates.

<!-- image -->

towns, than losses among older workers because the elimination of employment opportunities for youth, particularly in single-industry towns, is likely to cause young workers to leave these communities in order to find work elsewhere. The community  impact  of  these  labor  force  changes  is  analyzed in more detail in the next section.

## COMMUNITY SUSTAINABILITY

The impact of labor structure change and mobility  will  be  most  noticeable  in  mill  towns,  that  is, towns in which the sawmill is the only large employer.  Towns  such  as  Tahsis,  Chemainus,  and Youbou on Vancouver Island are mill towns that historically have depended primarily on their sawmills. Port Alberni, Harmac, and Powell River are larger mill towns in which the sawmill has historically been a less important part of an integrated forest  products  manufacturing  complex.  Finally, the mills in Vancouver are a small part of a complex urban labor market.

According  to  this  hierarchy  of  communities in our database, sustainability in small mill towns may be more directly assessed by examining the fate of their sawmills. It is more difficult to make the  connection between the fate of labor forces and  the  fate  of  a  community  in  complex  labor markets. However, insofar as changes in sawmill labor  demography  reflect  broader  shifts  in  the forest  products  manufacturing  labor  force,  they provide indicator data on the potential commu-

nity impact of these changes. Such data are strongest for the most mill-dependent towns.

Most of the sawmills in this study initiated major  capital  investments  in  technology  in  the  late 1970s and early 1980s. The dramatic shift in employment  after  the  recession  of  the  early  1980s represents a combination of cutbacks in production and replacement of labor by capital-intensive equipment.  Absolute,  regional,  and  age-specific employment  after  years  of  fairly  stable  employment patterns show a dramatic shift by 1985.

The cohort study indicates that about 60% of the sawmill workforce employed during the peak years  in  the  1970s  remained  employed  in  the mills after the recession of the early 1980s. These results are similar to those found in the Forestry Sector Labour Adjustment Study, which indicates that  56%  of  B.C.  sawmill  workers  employed  in 1978 were still employed in a sawmill in 1985 (Cohen &amp; Allen 1988). The latter study found that, of the 100 workers who had a sawmill job in 1978, 44% had lost their sawmill jobs by 1985. (Table 1) They found that 62% of these workers managed to  find  another  job  by  1985.  However,  of  these, only  16%  found  employment somewhere in the forestry industry other than a sawmill. Eighty-four percent  of  those  who  managed  to  find  another job  found  one  outside  the  industry.  By  linking this  information  to  income  tax  files,  they  were able  to  ascertain  that  workers  who  found  jobs elsewhere within the forestry industry kept their incomes  stable.  However,  those  who  obtained

TABLE 1

|   # of workers in 1978 | # of workers in 1985      | Income of workers in 1985 1   |
|------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------|
|                    100 | 56 (still in mills)       | 35,906                        |
|                    100 | 6 (in other f.p.i. 2 )    | 33,761                        |
|                    100 | 21 ( jobs outside f.p.i.) | 21,147                        |
|                    100 | 2 (EI)                    | 6,306                         |
|                    100 | 15 (no job/no EI)         | 0                             |

jobs outside the industry were earning 33% less in 1985  than  their  sawmill  jobs  had  paid  in  1978, $21,147 compared with $31,435. In addition, a total of 17% of the workers employed in a sawmill in 1978 were unemployed by 1985.

When  one  combines  the  information  from both the cohort study and the Labour Adjustment study, it is clear that there has been a large loss of jobs from the sawmill and forestry sector, and that this job loss has the most severe impact on young

workers and those near retirement. It is also clear that even for those who obtained reemployment, income levels earned in 1985 were drastically reduced from 1978 levels. (Table 2.)

If one assumes that no migration took place in  the  affected  communities  between  1978  and 1985,  there  is  a  net  income  loss  of  $83,991,816 just in terms of personal income. This does not include lost municipal tax revenue and any associated downturn in local economic activity.

|                                                       | TABLE 2     | TABLE 2     |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------|-------------|
|                                                       | 1978        | 1985        |
| Estimated wages from 12 mills 1                       | 332,238,218 | 186,053,042 |
| Income from workers who obtained other f.p.i. 2  jobs |             | 19,934,293  |
| Income from workers who obtained non-f.p.i. jobs      |             | 41,091,370  |
| EI income                                             |             | 1,166,988   |
| Totals                                                | 332,238,218 | 248,246,402 |
| Net Loss                                              |             | 83,991,816  |

- 1 All incomes in 1985 Canadian dollars.
- 2 f.p.i. 5 Forest products industry.

Labor  demographic  changes  for  small  sawmill towns are more directly translatable to community sustainability than for urban regions and more diversified  mid-size  towns  such  as  Port  Alberni. Given this fact, and combining the cohort study with the Forestry Sector Labour  Force Study, it is clear that the approximately 40% employment  losses  in  the  sawmill  cohort  probably translated to a minimum 25% income loss for the community, assuming that the unemployed workers did not out-migrate.

If one also assumes out-migration took place, and this is a much more likely scenario in singlemill towns, then overall economic loss to the community was likely more than 25%. In addition, as the  termination-by-age-group  data  indicates,  the brunt  of  employment  loss  was  borne  by  young workers. The elimination of entry points for young workers into industry in single or restricted industry towns may force these workers to look for work in  other  communities  leading  to  premature  economic and demographic community senescence.

Besides these direct losses, there are a number of less direct fiscal and health-related losses. There are costs to the municipality in lost forest company taxes, as well as losses to municipal, provincial,  and  federal  governments  in  other  tax shortfalls  resulting  from  the  employment  downturn.  For  example,  according  to  a  recent  survey by the Regional Data Corporation, municipal tax revenue in Powell River dropped by 15% between 1990 and 1993. The same study indicates an increase in the economic dependency ratio, which is  a  measure  of  the  extent  to  which  transfer  income from other levels of government enters the community  in  order  to  replace  the  income  lost from industry layoffs.

Unemployment  creates  indirect  costs  for  all levels of government. Both the anticipation of unemployment in employed groups of workers and unemployment itself have been linked to a range of  disease  outcomes  including  heart  disease  and psychiatric disorders (D'Arcy &amp; Siddique 1985; Jin et  al. 1995;  Mattiasson et  al. 1990;  Westin et  al. 1989). In 1995, the suicide rate among the unemployed in B.C. was 11 times that of the total labor force (B.C. Division of Vital Statistics. 1995). The suicide rate for young males is usually high, but the impact  of  unemployment  may  render  this  group even more vulnerable. The health consequences of unemployment are enormous. They are paid for by tax dollars, but the cost is not usually included in the accounting process when the cost of technological change in industry is measured.

Direct and indirect health and other welfarerelated  costs  of  labor  force  reduction  can  be viewed as a public subsidy to labor force structural change carried out within the private sector. If total  company  income  remains  stable  or  even  increases after these structural changes in the labor force,  and  if  the  taxpayer  covers  the  health  and welfare  costs  incurred  by  these  changes,  then  a massive  public  subsidy  of  the  private  sector  will have occurred. Furthermore, it will have occurred within an ideological and political atmosphere in which the federal government has been withdrawing  massive  funds  from  health,  welfare,  unemployment  insurance,  and  labor  force  retraining, placing the burden of this hidden public subsidy increasingly on the provincial government. In addition, the subsidy will have occurred in the political  environment  of  the  1980s  and  1990s,  when private  enterprise  unfettered  by  government  is the supposed  panacea  for  modern  economic woes.

Clearly, changes in mill technology affect labor  force  demography  and  community  sustainability. Because long-term sustainability of the forest-based  community  ultimately  depends  on  the long-term  sustainability  of  the  forest  ecosystems that  supply  its  mills  with  logs,  it  is  important  to ground  changes  in  technology,  labor  demography,  and  community  sustainability  within  a  construct of ecosystem health. The first step is to attempt to gauge the changing ecological footprint of these mills over time.

## ECOSYSTEM SUSTAINABILITY

In  B.C.  the  pressure  on  forest  ecosystems  has  increased  dramatically.  The  Annual  Allowable  Cut (AAC), the volume of trees the Ministry allows to be cut on forest tenures in the province, amounted to 60.8 million cubic meters in 1975. By 1980 this had increased to 66.7 million cubic meters. By the middle of the decade it was up to 67.3 million cubic meters, and by the end of the decade it was 74.3 million cubic meters. This amounts to an increase of  volume  allocated  in  forest  tenures  of  about  1 million  cubic  meters  per  year  since  1976.  By  the 1980s 'the capacity of current operating mills exceeded the AAC by about a third' (Marchak 1995).

It  is  clear,  therefore, that after the mid-1970s there was a significant increase in the rate at which the carrying capacity of the B.C. forests has been appropriated. This increase has, for the entire decade, hovered above the Ministry's own estimates of ecosystem sustainability. In effect, ecological ap-

propriations above an ecologically sustainable limit have helped fuel the shift toward a more technology intensive industrial system.

One way  of  measuring  the  impact  of  such  a change is to determine the ecological footprint of each  mill,  or  the  quantity  of  logs  each  mill  consumes over time. Ideally one would want to know the exact quantity of logs consumed per unit time. This information is not available, but estimates of annual mill production are available for 8 of the 14 study  mills for selected  years  from  1950-1985 (Miller Freeman 1986). These data can be used to examine the mill's changing impact on the ecosystems that supply them with logs.

The ecological footprint is therefore proportional to the volume of lumber produced per mill during  each  of  the  five  time  periods  for  which data  are  available  (Figure  3).  The  eight  large coastal mills show a greater than 60% increase in their production volume from 1949 to 1965 and, therefore, a 60% increase in ecological footprint. Thereafter the rate of increase slows, but the footprint per mill in 1985 is still nearly twice its 1949 size. As an aside, it should be emphasized that an increased rate of production of wood means increased logging which, in turn, means more road building and encroachment into wilderness areas, with consequent impacts on forest sustainability.

During  this  time  period  of  1949-1985,  the

number of workers  in  these  mills  first  increased, reaching  a  peak  in  the  late  1970s,  and  then  decreased drastically in the early 1980s. It is therefore instructive  to  consider  the  changing  ecological footprint of a sawmill worker, expressed as millions of board feet (Mbf) per worker, for this time period. (Figure 4). Clearly, by 1985, technology had increased the ecological footprint of each sawmill worker from 154 Mbfm to 330 Mbfm.

The rate of increase in lumber production per mill accelerated fastest between 1956 and 1965 as the  industry  moved  away  from  recession  and  entered  the  boom  period  of  the  1960s  and  1970s. Over the 20-year period, 1965-1985, lumber production at the eight coastal mills increased by only 10%. Lumber production increased more rapidly than this in the industry as a whole, probably because rates of increase were faster in the Interior, which was the first to move to new sawmill technology. Thus, our sample of eight large coastal mills is really a snapshot of production in a less technologically advanced sector of the sawmill industry.

The  eight  mills  do  not  show  a  startling  increase in the rate of draw-down of natural capital in an era when the rest of the industry consumed more of  B.C.'s  forests  than  ever  before.  In  fact, these  data  show  that  the  large  increases  in  production  occurred  in  the  late  1950s  and  early 1960s. However, Figure 4 illustrates that on a per

Lumber Production per Mill for 8 Large Coastal Sawmills from 1949 to 1985*

<!-- image -->

Lumber production expressed in terms of millions of board feet per mill.

FIGURE 3. Lumber production per mill for eight large coastal sawmills from 1949-1985.

Lumber Production per Worker in 8 Large Coastal Sawmills from 1949 to 1985*

<!-- image -->

Lumber production expressed in terms of millions of board per sawmill worker. feet

FIGURE 4. Lumber production per worker for eight large coastal sawmills from 1949-1985.

worker rather than a per mill basis, the increase in productivity, or the individual worker's ecological footprint, between 1976 and 1985 is the largest in the history of these mills.

## CONCLUSIONS

The sawmill is  a  site  where  raw  natural  capital  is transformed rather than consumed. Furthermore, the ecological footprint is usually assigned to the population which is the site of consumption of the mill's lumber. Assigning an ecological footprint to the  site  of  transformation  rather  than  consumption, decouples the link between the consumption of specific population groups and its impact on the ecosystem.

The inherent danger in using the ecological footprint in this way is that its utility as an educational and analytical tool may be blunted. During the 1980s and 1990s, for example, Japan has become the final destination for an increasing number of trees processed in B.C. coastal mills. These changes in the B.C. lumber market result in an increased ecological footprint for Japan in general and for various Japanese cities and regions in particular. By focusing on transformation rather than final consumption, the specific links between consumption in  Japan  and  ecosystem  draw-down  in B.C. are not made explicit.

There  are  advantages,  however,  in  assigning ecological  footprints  to  the  site  of  the  extraction and transformation of natural capital. First, for a nation like Canada which engages heavily in direct natural  resource  extraction  with  minimal  valueadded manufacturing and export, the trade-off between ecosystem depletion and community benefit needs to be explicit in order to determine the sustainability of the transformation process, both for communities  engaged  in  the  process  and  ecosystems supplying the natural resource.

Second, the ecological footprint as it is generally  used  is  calculated  from  a  range  of  essential items  and  expressed  in  land  area  needed  to  produce them. The power of the concept lies in its ability to make explicit the impact on ecosystems of the general consumption patterns of a defined population. While the ecological footprint links consumption patterns to nature, and expresses the impact of consumption in terms of land area needed to support it, there is no identification of the location or type of land-bases or ecosystems that are being exploited. Because it is primarily a planning and educational  tool,  the  ecological  footprint  focuses  on the  final  consuming  population  rather  than  the specific ecosystem being consumed or the population groups engaged in transforming natural products on their way to the final site of consumption.

Canadian  industries  such  as  sawmilling,  fishing, and mining, which are heavily reliant on the

direct harvesting and minimal processing of products of natural ecosystems and which have communities  that  are  highly  dependent  on  these  industries, lend themselves to a particular adaptation of the ecological footprint. The approach is centered on the specific ecosystems and associated communities engaged in their extraction and transformation rather than on the population consuming the products. The focus on minimally transformed natural products such as the number of fish caught or the  quantity  of  lumber  produced,  produces  a rough indication, albeit an underestimation, of the direct draw-down of natural capital as well as locating the site of this draw-down. This approach links the costs and benefits of transformation with site or region-specific ecosystem exploitation.

The  measure  of community  sustainability used in this study was also somewhat crude, being based on the number of hourly pay jobs in sawmills. In spite of the crudeness of the measure of community  sustainability  used  in  this  investigation, it is clear from other studies of sawmills during the recession of the early 1980s, that the loss of hourly pay jobs in mills were largely mirrored by  reductions  in  salaried  positions,  contracted work, and office staff, indicating that fluctuations in hourly pay mill jobs are a fairly valid indicator of  changes  in  community  benefit  from  mill  employment (Grass &amp; Hayter 1989).

The discussion has until now focused on underlying methods and their limitations. But what are  the  main  findings  of  this  investigation?  The case study, involving about 20% of workers in the coastal  sawmill  industry,  showed  that  the  downturn  of  the  early  1980s  was  particularly  hard  on younger workers. In part, this was because of the seniority-based system in the mills which ensured that  those  with  less  seniority,  who  are  generally the younger workers, are most likely to be laid off.

The  increased  personal  ecological  footprint of those workers who remained in the industry is a  function  of  a  new  industrial  strategy  that  replaces labor investment with capital. New technologies  enable  workers  to  be  more  productive. While each worker can transform more trees into lumber than ever before, as a group there were about  40%  fewer  of  them  after  the  recession. Even with this drastically reduced and more aged workforce,  the  ecological  footprint  of  the  eight coastal  mills  increased  between  1976  and  1985, principally because of increased productivity per worker.

A classical or neoclassical economist might be pleased  with  such  productivity  increases,  but  an

ecological economist might see it in a less positive light.  The  new  technical  infrastructure  now  in place in most sawmills is more capable than ever of accelerating the pace of forest ecosystem drawdown. This enhanced production capacity was established at a time when B.C.'s coastal forest ecosystems,  which  have  historically  been  overharvested, are under increasing pressure from other forest sector uses such as tourism.

This is the Innes's cycle in action. As this investigation  shows,  the  infrastructure  left  in  place  in the coastal mills is the most efficient the industry has ever seen. The irony of this situation is that the coastal  forest  ecosystems  are  moving  into  their least productive phase at a time when a more efficient industry is creating intense production pressure.  The  efficiency  of  production  methods  ensures that forest ecosystems will come under more intense stress from harvesting activity.

These  technological changes  in the forest products  industry  will  effect  forest  communities. The direct impact is job loss, reduced incomes, and a smaller tax base. The indirect losses range from increased migration of younger workers, increased community  instability,  and  increased  health  and welfare costs associated with community instability and employment losses. These losses are likely particularly  strong  in  small,  highly  dependent  mill communities. Indirect costs such as these are not usually part of the accounting procedure. The extent to which the government must step in to deal with health and social costs incurred in industrial restructuring amounts to a public subsidy which is usually unrecognized by the private sector.

Calculation  of  the  ecological  footprint  used in conjunction with measures of community sustainability  can  usefully  illuminate  the  links  and tradeoffs that occur in some industries at the level of  ecosystem  and  community  health.  While  the results of this particular case study may be not be encouraging, the development and application of new planning and conceptual tools like these may at least begin the process of making explicit the costs of industrial change and development. Perhaps in this way, Innes's seemingly inevitable and very  Canadian cycle of destruction will be made both more explicit and remediable.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I  would like to acknowledge the support and intellectual guidance of Dr. Clyde Hertzman in this project. To the B.C. Health Research Foundation

and the Canadian Institute of Advanced Research for  their  financial  support.  To  the  University  of British Columbia Task Force on Planning Healthy and Sustainable Communities.

## REFERENCES

Barnes, T.J. &amp; Hayter, R. (1995) The Restructuring of Forest Communities: Flexibility Perspectives. Conference Proceedings. Joint Simon Fraser University of British  Columbia  Conference  on  Harold  Innis  and  the BC Forest Industry .  University of B.C., Dept. of Geography, p. 9.

- B.C. Division of Vital Statistics. (1995) Quarterly digest. 5 , 2.
- Cohen,  C.,  &amp;  Allen,  D.R.  (1988) Forestry  Sector  Labour Adjustment Study. Report for Employment &amp; Immigration Canada, Labour Canada, Industry, Science and Technology Canada. Labour Canada, Ottawa, pp. 18-19.

D'Arcy, C. &amp; Siddique, C.M. (1985) Health and unemployment: Findings from a national survey. International Journal of Health Services Research 15 , 609-635.

Grass, E. &amp; Hayter, R. (1989) Employment change during  recession:  The  experience  of  forest  product manufacturing plants in British Columbia, 19811985. The Canadian Geographer 33 , 240-252.

Hayter,  R.  &amp;  Barnes,  T.J.  (1990)  Innis'  staple  theory, exports,  and  recession:  British  Columbia,  19811986. Economic Geography 6 , 156-173.

Hertzman,  C.,  Teschke,  K.,  Ostry,  A.,  Hershler,  R., Dimich-Ward, H., Kelly, S., Spinelli, J., Gallagher, R., McBride,  M.,  Marion,  S.A.  (1997)  Cancer  incidence and mortality in sawmill workers exposed to chlorophenols. American Journal of Public Health 87 , 71-79.

Jin, R.L., Shah, P.C., Svoboda, T.J. (1995) The impact of unemployment on health: A review of the evidence. Canadian Medical Association Journal 153 , 529-540.

Marchak,  P.M.  (1995) Logging  the  Globe. pp.  90,  95. McGill-Queen's University Press, Montreal, PQ. Mattiasson,  I.,  Lindgarde,  F.,  Nilsson,  J.,  Theorell,  T. (1990) Threat of unemployment and cardiovascular risk factors: Longitudinal study of quality of sleep and serum cholesterol concentrations in men threatened with redundancy. British Medical Journal 301 , 461-466. Miller Freeman. (1986) Miller Freeman Lumber Directory 1950-1985. Council of Forest Industries, Vancouver. Rapport, D.J. (1995) Ecosystem health: Exploring the territory. Ecosystem Health 1 , 5-13. Rapport,  D.J.  (1998a)  Defining  ecosystem  health.  In: Rapport, D.J., Costanza, R., Epstein, P., Gaudet, C. Levins, R. (eds) Ecosystem Health. pp. 18-33. Blackwell Science, Oxford, U.K. Rapport,  D.J.,  Costanza,  R.,  McMichael,  A.J.  (1998b) Assessing  ecosystem  health. Trends  in  Ecology  and Evolution 13 , 397-402. Regional Data Corporation (1994). Projected Impacts of Land-Use Changes on Vancouver Island Upon Forest  Sector  Work  Force  and  Income  Support Programs, Union of B.C. Municipalities,  Vancouver, B.C., pp. 1. Travers, O.R. (1993) Forest policy: Rhetoric and reality. In:  Drushka,  K.,  Nixon,  R.,  Travers,  O.R.  (eds) Touch Wood: BC Forests at the Cross Roads. pp.  189, 190. Harbour Publishing, Madeira Park, BC. Wackernagel, M. &amp; Rees, W. (1996) Our Ecological Footprint: Reducing Human Impact on the Earth. New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, BC.

Westin, S., Schlesselman, J.J., Korper, M. (1989) Longterm  effects  of  a  factory  closure:  Unemployment and disability during ten years' follow-up. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 42 , 435-441.