## The notion of technological unemployment

Guy STANDING *

## I. Introduction

Every depression produces its sages who point to technological change as a fundamental cause of the malaise or as the means of escape. The present depression is no exception.  The optimists see automation, information 1 technology and micro-chips as freeing us from the drudgery of work, creating leisure, earlier retirement and a return to "vernacular values". The pessimists see new machines and organisations accelerating de-skilling, reducing work creativity, creating mass unemployment and standardising consumption.  Even union leaders are claiming that never again can 2 industrialised countries achieve full employment. 3

Technological unemployment is a widely used, if elusive, concept ; it is often coupled with other forms of unemployment no easier to define, notably frictional, voluntary and structural." Unravelling the links would help in formulating macro-economic policy, but conceptual oversimplification has contributed to the inability to integrate technological change into labour market analyses.

Concern over technological unemployment is usually traced to the Luddite riots of early nineteenth-century Britain. But Ludditism can be interpreted in three ways. Usually, it is seen as a protest against the destruction of jobs, against capital-labour substitution. A second interpretation is that it reflected the resistance of skilled workers to the substitution of semi-skilled and unskilled machine operators. A third view sees technology as a threat to the workers' way of living, changing the pattern of consumer and producer demand so as to provoke a shift to less job-creating goods or imports. All three views reveal genuine fears that are scarcely assuaged by those who cite the necessity of technological progress for economic growth in a competitive world or who glibly claim that such fears are based on the "lump of labour fallacy".

This article, after briefly defining technological change, examines forms of technological unemployment found in economic literature, bearing in mind that the term has often been subsumed under "structural" Unemployment. It then reviews cyclical links and "long-wave" theories in which

technological innovation is a basic explanatory variable. Technological change is then linked to the international redistribution of unemployment, after which other long-term trends are briefly considered.

## II. Defining technological change

The production process is often oversimplified into a two-factor production function, consisting of combinations of "capital" and "labour", in which capital encompasses all non-labour factors. But the production process can be regarded as combining inputs, organising work and disposing of the output and proceeds in various ways. Technological change might affect any part of it, from the form or combination of raw materials or means of production, such as machines and transport equipment, to organising the work process or modifying the form or composition of output, primarily by introducing new commodities or services. It has also been taken, e.g. by Schumpeter, to include new forms of business organisation and the creation or penetration of new markets. Such definitional breadth has its drawbacks, but it would be wrong to depict technological change as merely machinelabour substitution.

Some technological changes have been organisational, as in the case of assembly-line production introduced early in the twentieth century at Ford, which tilted the balance in favour of the internal combustion engine, rather than electric or steam-powered vehicles. Recall too Adam Smith's dictum that the division of labour is limited by the extent of the market ; it is not just a reflection of more sophisticated machines. Indeed, technological change may occur without extra investment, as with learning-by-doing and work process modifications. And technological change does not necessarily imply technological progress, which consists of changes that increase total factor productivity.

For present purposes, several distinctions are essential, the first being between invention, innovation and diffusion. There are usually long lags between an invention and its introduction ; similarly, an innovation might be made in one firm but be ignored by most of the industry for years. Dating a technical change has caused difficulty for those examining its impact on employment, particularly where long-wave theories of growth are concerned, so that attention must focus on the application and diffusion of innovations.

Another distinction has been made between basic, improvement and /weMíío-innovations. The first are split into "technological basic innovations" creating new products, markets and industries, and "non-technical innovations" leading to new cultural activities, social services or forms of administration.  The second extend a branch of industry, improving product 5 quality, reducing production costs and introducing refinements.  The third 6 are supposedly characteristic of large firms after opportunities for improvement innovations have been exhausted, at the end of a product life cycle,

when production has been standardised and organisation made inflexible. 7 This threefold distinction is useful. But there are ambiguities - e.g. an improvement innovation may be such as to lead to a massive shift of resources, as with the assembly line. The distinction invites ex post theorising, with an innovation defined as basic according to its effects rather than its actual characteristics.

A more widely accepted distinction is between product and process innovations, the former involving new goods or services, the latter changes in the production process. Here too there are ambiguities. It is not always easy to define new products, and a process innovation may affect a product's quality, ease of use or durability, such that it could be seen as a product change.

Another distinction has been made betwen radical, major and minor innovations, which run into similar operational problems, being liable to lead to arbitrary ex post classifications. Another hazy distinction is between output-expanding innovations, encompassing new products and expanded production of existing products, and cost-reducing innovations, which lower the costs of making existing products. There is also the distinction between labour-saving, neutral and capital-saving technological change.  And there is 8 the Hicksian distinction betwen autonomous and induced innovations (which Hicks called inventions).  The latter reflect changes in relative prices and 9 wages; all others are autonomous. Finally, some have distinguished between mechanisation and automation, the former involving output growth more rapid than growth of labour productivity, the latter growth in productivity greater than output. Automation involves labour substitution ; with mechanisation this is less certain. 10 In sum, technological change embraces diverse possibilities, which rather complicates the notion of technological unemployment.

## III. Classical and neo-classical perspectives

As many controversies surrounding technological unemployment stem from the insights of classical economists, it is instructive to consider the evolution of ideas on the topic. The early mercantilists favoured machinery and labour-saving devices, as long as they increased exports that could obtain precious metals to facilitate economic growth. In a remarkably "modern" way, they regarded the proper role of government as compensating through public expenditure for any displacement of labour.

On the desirability of technological change, the Physiocrats were more equivocal. Being defenders of agriculture, they suspected technological change in manufacturing, seeing it as drawing funds away from agriculture. They favoured it in farming as a way of raising revenue and rural employment and absorbing some of the urban unemployed. In modern terms, they were concerned with "capital-shortage" unemployment arising from the use of scarce capital in urban industry.

Classical economists of the late eighteenth century onwards focused on long-run trends, and raised the spectre of the stationary State due to a longrun tendency for the profit rate to fall with accumulation. For Adam Smith, technical change advanced the division of labour or, as some modern labour theorists would say, it "de-skilled". An increasing division of labour facilitated production with less labour, necessitating more investment in means of production and raw materials merely to maintain the level of employment."

Some early classical economists, notably Say, ruled out technological unemployment, depicting only phases of adjustment in which the price mechanism would restore employment, directly through increasing demand for the products affected by labour-saving mechanisation, and indirectly through greater expenditure on other products resulting from the lower price of the products directly affected. 12 Malthus was more pessimistic, believing that machinery could cause unemployment through underconsumption and capital shortage, though he reasoned that machines would "open markets", thereby restoring employment. Ricardo agonised most over the issue, adding his famous chapter " On machinery" to the third edition of his Principles. He argued that technological change reduced prices without affecting the average profit rate, which was determined by agricultural improvements (themselves only checking diminishing returns to land). He saw machinery as converting circulating into fixed capital, leaving less to be paid in wages; price reductions due to lower unit costs would raise profits and production, so raising employment, possibly back to the previous level. 13 For Ricardo, further mechanisation could increase profits while reducing the demand for labour, so that to maintain employment required an accelerating rate of investment, which would be checked by the falling profit rate.

Against Ricardo, McCulloch argued that jobs in machine construction would compensate for labour displaced by the machines and that unemployment would result only from adjustment to the new structure of demand. Later, Senior ruled out the significance of machine-displacing unemployment, claiming that the costs of machines would come out of profits rather than the wage fund and that they would be offset by greater productivity. He also claimed that mechanisation in the capital goods industries raised profits and stimulated investment, supposedly offsetting the labour-displacing mechanisation, though there seems no reason for that.

John Stuart Mill drew the threads of the classical debate together, concluding that as technical changes only occur slowly they have little adverse effect. He claimed that fixed capital only grew rapidly in times of rapid increases in circulating capital - or in modern terms, technical innovation only came in "swarms" in times of rapid economic growth when demand for labour was expanding.

Two other classical economists contributed theories of modern relevance. Cairnes argued that adjustment to technical change was hindered by labour immobility and the existence of "non-competing groups" of workers,

a view that was the precursor of theories of labour market segmentation. But the most important proponent of phenomena akin to technological unemployment was Karl Marx, whose contributions have been extended in modern theories of business cycles, long waves and the labour process. For Marx, there is a long-run trend towards a rising organic composition of capital, technological progress leading to a substitution of constant for variable capital, associated with a decline in the average profit rate. This leads to a surplus population, as labour is displaced through the growth of constant capital and the division of labour. But overlying this trend is a shortrun process by which accumulation occurs through cycles of productive expansion and contraction, a phase of expansion leading to a "profit squeeze", a crisis, capital dØvalorisation and real wage reductions, in turn providing opportunities for investment and further development of productive forces, with temporarily higher profits. A feature of this process is that innovations occur mainly in depressions, whereas in prosperous phases the focus of investment is expansion of known technologies.

Such issues were bypassed by neo-classical theory, which made the link between technological change and unemployment rather ephemeral. Through the price mechanism, including the interest rate, and the presumed ease of factor substitution, technological change could cause only temporary departures from equilibrium. We can identify problems with this model, but will do so in assessing forms of technological unemployment proposed in recent years.

## IV. Forms of technological unemployment

It is arguable whether displacement caused by the classic type of capitallabour substitution should be termed technological unemployment if macroeconomic policies could restore the level of employment. Those who believe in such technological unemployment assume either that market mechanisms would not correct the imbalance or that macro-economic expansionary policies would be insufficient to do so. The latter eventuality would depend on general constraints associated with inflation, balance-of-payments disequilibrium or structural rigidities. 14

The basic neo-classical view is that technological unemployment is ruled out by Say's law of markets. If machines displace labour, either workers will be reabsorbed if unit costs fall, so that prices fall and demand for the product rises thereby increasing the demand for labour, or released workers will bid down wages, leading to labour-capital substitution elsewhere and a shift to output produced with lower capital-output ratios. There may be adjustment lags, but equilibrium in factor markets will be restored at full employment. 15 Besides price-induced substitutions, Marshall stressed that capital-labour substitution was really labour-labour substitution, in that more workers were making producer goods. This led to debates about the increasing "roundaboutedness" of production. The basic model also stipulates that the interest

rate keeps technological change in balance with savings. 16 Formally, overproduction cannot result from technological change because productivity growth is expected to lead to price and interest rate reductions.

Objections to the neo-classical model are concerned with the divergence of reality from theory. The most basic is that whatever the long-term tendencies to equilibrium, innovations raise unemployment because of adjustment lags. The neo-classical retort is that the theory is concerned with long-run tendencies and that technical change is usually slow and continuous. Thus, J. B. Clark formulated the notion of "synchronisation of technical progress", making it undisruptive. Most agree that there have been eras of disruptive technological change, but inexplicably this school of thought has tended to see such disruption only as a thing of the past. Operationally, it is also unclear what constitutes an adjustment lag.

That aside, the four major sources of controversy concern factor price rigidities, the feasibility of factor substitution, the industrial structure and the pattern of demand. There is insufficient space to go into the issues in detail, but one should mention the main areas of dispute.

Factor price rigidities have always attracted most debate. In every depression claims that capital-labour substitution has worsened unemployment have produced a chorus proclaiming the need for wage cuts and action to weaken unions' ability to withstand pressure on wages. Such claims have been made recently, and in the 1930s many economists accepted this argument." Objections to it have focused on the impact of lower wages on demand for the product and for labour. Lower wages reduce the potential domestic market for industrial goods ; there is a limit to wage cuts, as they impair efficiency and productivity (so not reducing labour costs) ; the wage elasticity of labour demand depends on capital availability for investment ; and any incentive to labour-capital substitution would have to be balanced against benefits from further capital-for-labour technological change. 18 There is also a dynamic issue. It has been claimed that labour-saving technological change is greatest in times of peak demand, owing to labour shortages and rising labour costs. 19 But this neglects the likelihood that at such times labour resistance is greatest, and the employers ' need to secure a high effort bargain from workers most intense. It is in a depression that labour can least resist labour-displacing technical change.

Yet, if the efficacy of wage cuts is dubious, there has long been doubt about the effectiveness of the "price of capital" to maintain factor market equilibrium. Wicksell stressed the divergence of the "real" and "market" interest rates, the former being that which would limit technological investment to the savings level, thus limiting labour displacement, the latter being the result of monetary policies. And according to Hayek, if external factors or policies forced the market rate below the "natural" rate, investment would be inappropriately labour-saving because the cost of capital would be less than its real cost. From this perspective we could conceive of interest-rate induced technological unemployment. In a sense,

Keynes 's theory fits the mould with its focus on expectations and uncertainty. Simplifying, if the interest rate falls below the "marginal efficiency of capital" (MEC), excess liquidity preference will lower investment and employment. The MEC depends on prospective yield and on expectations of prospective yields from future rather than present investment ; thus if the future is expected to be better, investment will be postponed, i.e. the MEC will be reduced, making it necessary to reduce the short-term interest rate below the long-term rate. Conversely, if the profit rate is expected to fall the MEC will rise, stimulating current investment. But if firms expect a fall in real wages - or rather labour costs - they will postpone investment, which could create a vicious circle of falling wages and investment.

All this comes close to cyclical unemployment, and indeed some economists have equated technological unemployment with cyclical. But the point is that the neo-classical mechanism for restoring equilibrium has been questioned from the viewpoint of both key "prices", the wage and the interest rate. Accordingly, full employment might not be restored following labour-displacing technical change.

The role of expectations is complex, for rising wage expectations might deter even labour-saving innovations, if real wages were anticipated to rise faster than labour productivity. This might lead to unemployment from absence of innovation. One could then theorise about warranted and expected real wage growth, corresponding to interest-rate theories along such lines. If prices functioned as in the neo-classical model, rising unemployment would lower actual and expected real wages, and induce innovations. This brings us to the efficacy of unions in shielding workers from unemployment-induced wage cuts. Studies suggest that they have been slightly better at preventing falls than at achieving advances, though even their ability to prevent falls has been eroded. But suppose there is a climate in which politicians, the media, the business community and unions expect real wages to rise. This could stimulate process innovations beyond the rate warranted to maintain the level of employment at prevailing wage levels, so generating "technological" unemployment. Thus, scare stories about unions' power could cause unemployment because of employers' expectations of wage demands rather than because of any real ability of the unions to influence wages.

Another price-adjustment form of unemployment is what might be called frictional technological unemployment. As technological change influences the pattern of investment, there could be supply constraints in the "capital goods" sector. 20 These could raise the price of new capital goods relative to pre-innovation equipment, so restricting investment and raising unemployment. But it is "frictional" in that it would persist only if supply constraints were severe.

A second controversy concerns the feasibility of factor substitution, raising the possibility of "true" technological unemployment due to nonadjustability of factor proportions. Suppose that with available resources,

productive techniques and structure of demand for output, no changes in relative prices or wages would ensure full employment. If labour-absorptive capacity were rigid the elasticity of demand for labour would be zero, meaning that no amount of wage reductions would increase employment ; they would only alter income distribution and reduce workers' purchasing power, which might affect investment. Return to "equilibrium" could take considerable time. In that vein, "vintage models" have been conceived in which factor substitution is confined to ex ante investment decisions. Such "putty-clay" models assume that firms must use the latest techniques, so that changes in factor costs would not permit factor substitution. 21 If technical change were capital-using, reducing labour per unit of investment, demand for the product would have to grow to keep up with productivity growth. In macro-economic terms, a rising capital-output ratio requires investment to be a rising proportion of GDP. 22 Some analyses have used "clay-clay" models that assume no substitutability in current investment; the rate of technical progress determines the wage growth required to render enough old machines and plant unprofitable to release workers to operate all the new equipment. But such models soon become rather abstract devices.

One other difficulty with the factor proportions argument is the possibility of discontinuities; a 10 per cent wage reduction may have no effect, whereas a 50 per cent reduction would allow alternative techniques to be introduced. But such large changes in wages would surely be unrealistic and unacceptable.

A third area of controversy concerns the non-correspondence of the industrial structure with the dictates of perfect price competition. The neoclassical view is that monopolistic tendencies weaken price adjustments and accelerate mechanisation. 23 But monopolistic firms have the power to hinder technical change, and often want to do so, in so far as rapid change would make older plant, machinery and other equipment obsolescent. It is well known that large corporations have bought patents or established their own to prevent product innovations. A more competitive market would force firms to adapt or try to stay ahead of competitors. But it would be wrong to presume advantages of a competitive environment, for a rapid rate of innovation might result in premature obsolescence, reducing expected returns on investments and so discouraging it. Schumpeter was one who stressed that monopolies made for a steadier and less disruptive rate of technical change. The neo-classical presumption cannot be accepted a priori.

There is another twist, raising the possibility of monopolistic technological unemployment. A competitive industry may induce feverish product and pseudo-innovations; with monopolistic enterprises, product innovations might be slowed, but cost-reducing process innovations might be more common. Some have claimed that by slowing product innovation monopolies induce a "retardation of progress", reducing employment growth. The issue is unresolved, but in discussing this in the 1930s, an International Labour Review article argued that cartels and monopolies did not retard technical

change, on the grounds that their growth coincided precisely with an era of rapid technical change, "rationalisation" and increasing productivity. 24 It also argued that competition was "latent" because there were substitutes for those goods produced by cartels and monopolies. We could add that such market structures might shift competition from price adjustments to process innovations.

Variants of the market structure thesis have emerged in the context of technology transfer to industrialising economies and the adoption of "capital-intensive" technologies and products, supposedly raising unemployment. One view is that in monopolistic firms the profit-maximising objectives of "economic man" are subordinated to the technology preferences of "engineering man". 25 The implication is that less monopolistic industries would favour cost-minimising producers, so raising employment. But this begs two questions. First, the distribution of income and purchasing power influence product choice and sophistication, which largely dictate the technology. Second, advocates of high technology might argue that it comes as part of the package of inducing multinationals to expand in such countries ; if so, the opportunity cost of "inappropriate technology" could not be assessed in terms of the degree of monopoly or capital-labour ratios alone. This argument raises a host of familiar counter-objections.

Another form of alleged technological unemployment derives from the influence of product and process innovations on the employment structure, by affecting the "skill mix". The borderline between structural and technological unemployment is hazy here. The former could be attributed to shifts in labour supply, the latter to demand changes requiring changes in labour supply. If the production structure changed, raising the demand for factors with inelastic supply, there might be some adjustment effect, with bottlenecks co-existing with displacement of those with obsolescent skills. Changes in relative wages would be expected, and through changes in opportunity incomes workers would be expected to get the requisite training or retraining. But this too is problematical. Even assuming labour supply rigidities, there is no a priori reason to suppose that, to make the production structure more compatible with available skills, process innovations would not occur, altering the division of labour and so on. There is also no reason to assume that technological change is inherently skill-augmenting or liable to create radically new skill requirements; on-the-job retraining may be inexpensive and speedy, and the overall skill content may be reduced. Admittedly, if technological change led to skill obsolescence, workers with such skills might retain outdated and rigid wage expectations, and these might be exacerbated by social security provisions that base unemployment and related benefits partly on past income and work.

Through influencing the job structure, technological change surely influences the pattern of unemployment, notably the age-sex distribution. But such changes do not necessarily indicate anything about the unemployed's " employability " or their ability to adjust.

## V. Technological change and business cycles

Cyclical changes in aggregate demand have long been linked to fluctuations in innovation. Some economists, such as Wicksell, have equated business cycles with fluctuations of technical change ; others, including Marx, have speculated that the length of business cycles is a function of the replacement rate of specific generations of machinery and related investment. But any "capital goods life cycle" thesis is undermined by the fact that obsolescence is flexible and a function of profitability.

Others have hypothesised that the predominant type of innovation changes according to the phase of the cycle. In an upswing, there is growing investment in plant, machinery and new products, associated with higher profits; at such times product innovations come in swarms - at least according to Schumpeter and those in his tradition - and employment grows, so that the technological change is not labour-displacing in net terms. In a boom, innovators in the upswing are widely copied, competition whittling away above-average profits of an upswing; innovations are increasingly improvement and pseudo-improvement changes, expanding the existing technological base. As this proceeds, there is a "profits squeeze" leading to a recession (declining demand and investment), during which loss-making enterprises resort to process and pseudo-improvement innovations to cut costs. This leads to labour displacement, lowering aggregate demand, and thence to a depression, unless government intervention stimulates demand. The unemployment of a depression has been characterised as " technological" because innovation is supposedly "cyclical by nature". 26 But in a depression, cost-reducing labour-displacing innovations predominate, though some theorists postulate that it is precisely then that radical product innovations are introduced. Marx speculated on this possibility, as did Mensch recently in regard to long-wave theories. 27

## VI. Technology, long waves and unemployment

It has long been claimed that superimposed on medium-term (eight to nine years, possibly getting shorter) business cycles are long waves of economic fluctuation. So-called "Kondratieff cycles" supposedly last from 50 to 60 years, one depression coming about 50 years after the last one. The theory's defenders have traced emergence from slumps to radical innovations, be it the factory system, the railway, the motor car, electricity or microelectronics. A depression may induce such breakthroughs, partly by reducing capital values and freeing resources for broadly based investment. That makes more sense than the view that innovations simply flow from scientific discovery, for there is often a long interval between inventions and their diffusion as innovations. But rather than being the initial stimulus ending a depression, innovations are more likely to be a response to the belief that it is ending. And the longer a depression the greater the accumulation of ideas

and technical breakthroughs awaiting a propitious moment for implementation. There is nothing remarkable about "swarms of innovations" in the early stages of an upturn.

What seems to follow is that after a phase of technological diffusion, in which new enterprises reap monopoly profits, there is a period of slower growth and retrenchment by major enterprises, some taking time to re-equip and diversify to counter the challenge. In doing so, they force out less capitalised firms or undercut rivals. As in the present shake-out of electronics firms, often those that go bankrupt are the pioneering technical leaders. Slowly, firms find markets for their products relatively saturated, which leads to competitive attempts to raise productivity, and "pseudo-improvement" innovations. As production focuses on consumer replacement, excess capacity emerges, and labour displacement results. One might call the result "saturation" technological unemployment.

One issue arising from this is the relation between the emergence of new products or industries and the relative or absolute decline of old ones. The latter might proceed considerably before investors shifted resources to new avenues of growth, or after resources had been switched to new industries. Probably both occur, and it may be that both inventions and declining industries are required to generate a climate conducive to swarms of product innovations.

A variant of the long-wave theory sees a long upswing as a period of rapid capital accumulation, leading to overaccumulation, a profit squeeze, and a marking down of capital values (dØvalorisation). In the upswing, the working class achieves higher wages and bargaining power. But in a depression, it is forced to accept lower real wages ; this boosts expected profits, and only after "historical defeats of the working class" will investment respond to "system-shocks". 28 This theory discerns a long-run tendency for the rate of profit to decline, interrupted by cyclical fluctuations, during which profit rates rise until competition leads to a profit squeeze, followed by the fall of capital values and the loss of bargaining strength of workers, lowering the organic composition of capital, so raising the profit rate and postponing stagnation. The profit squeeze and depression induce cost-reducing process innovations, which help create a climate for expansion and make labour more abundant for it. That climate can lead to dangerous "social innovations", illustrated by the rise of fascism and German rearmament in the 1930s. It is hardly encouraging that the current depression is a period of expansion of the international arms industry. But another feature of depressions is the accelerated decline of old industries as technologically advancing new industries continue to expand and reorganise.

A difficulty with long-wave theories that attribute primacy to technology is that of distinguishing cause from effect. Rather than being the cause of upswings, potential innovations accumulate during depressions and may then be compressed to take advantage of an upswing. What is also unclear from technology-explained long waves is the ability of governments to compensate

## International Labour Review

for recessionary tendencies by stimulating product innovations. If it were merely a question of "technological stalemate" involving a vicious circle of low expected profits (low MEG) and unimplemented inventions, technology development policies - including subsidies, credit and R and D support should be able to overcome the depression. But if that explanation were invalid, technology development policy, as increasingly pursued by OECD countries as a response to the depression, would scarcely succeed. Indeed, if long waves had a socio-economic explanation that gave technology a subsidiary role, such intervention, by itself, would be ineffective and possibly counterproductive. That is why technological explanations are inadequate, because an upswing requires a prior increase in expected profits and because socio-economic factors determine long-term changes in the production structure, associated with international shifts in production and the division of labour.

## VII. The international redivision of labour

Technology is being used to change the international division of labour, and is thus influencing the growth and redistribution of global unemployment. This can be seen through the nature of technological change, the role of multinational corporations and government responses.

In the course of global industrialisation, there have been shifts in "technological leadership". In the 1820s, the leading country was the United Kingdom; in the 1870s, the United States and Germany were the most prominent; in the 1930s, the United States was decidedly the leader; and in the 1960s, Japan started to become a leading innovator. Correspondingly, the distribution of manufacturing jobs changed. The reasons for changing technological leadership are not our present concern, but have something to do with inertia and difficulty of decumulation in the country of earlier leadership, changing relative costs, and the creation of social conditions allowing new forms of labour and organisation. But once a country establishes a technological lead, it will have a trade advantage as long as the "imitation gap" exceeds the lag between the innovation and the generation of demand for the new products. From this, economists have derived "technology gap" theories of trade balances, and by implication have indicated a mechanism by which technology has influenced the international distribution of unemployment. 29 One aspect is that technological leaders have a balance-of-trade surplus while others have a mounting deficit, which forces them to deflate, thus raising unemployment and discouraging national technical change (product and improvement innovations). 30

The role of multinationals should be seen in the context of the changing character of technologically leading industries, whereby there has been a shift from primarily extractive, energy-using, resource-based to informationoriented production. Multinationals have increased the international division of labour through greater vertical integration, helped by the shift from what

has been called "centripetal" to "centrifugal" technology. 31 This has meant less resource-based technology, with its economies of scale, and a shift from heavy industries, using large numbers of skilled manual workers, to production relying on a mass of "semi-skilled" workers coupled with a professional-technical Ølite. Facilitating this change have been improvements in international communications, transport and storage, and the creation of an internationally highly mobile managerial workforce.

Advances in the technical division of labour have undermined the "Leontief paradox" - the observation in the 1960s that, despite higher wage rates, exports from the United States were more labour-intensive than imports or non-exports. This was explained by the higher productivity of the country's more "skilled" labour force. But the growth in the technical division of labour has reduced reliance on craft skills, making "skilled" labour productivity differences less relevant. And low labour costs in industrialising countries have encouraged multinationals to shift jobs to subsidiaries there to a much greater extent, both for goods sold there and for exports. 32 These factors have also fostered the emergence of industrial enterprises in those countries, most notably in ASEAN. 33 And in some industries, notably textiles, firms in industrialised countries have subcontracted much of their labour-intensive production to companies in lowincome countries. 34 Joint ventures have grown and there has been a steady shift of labour-intensive industries from countries where they had been pillars of the economy. Finally, there has been intra-industry substitution, such as a shift to low-income countries of cotton fabrics coupled with a growth in industrialised countries of production of technologically advanced synthetic fibres.

The difficulty arises from attributing these changes, with their effect on the international distribution of unemployment, to technological factors per se. Labour costs have been higher in industrialised countries, and higher working-class incomes have contributed to a saturation of home markets in consumer goods and services; demand has become increasingly incomeelastic rather than price-elastic, contributing to a climate in which price rises became an easy option. An implication is that apy slowdown of product innovation would lead to demand saturation and unemployment. This is a form of saturation technological unemployment. Export opportunities to compensate for that tendency have been restricted, both by the tendency for saturation to be reached roughly at the same time in industrialised countries and by the changing international division of labour. With deflation and low expected profits, firms seeking outlets for liquid funds, as well as banks and international financial institutions, have contributed to the shift of employment and unemployment by channelling funds into industrialising economies, much of it through the Eurodollar market and IMF-backed loans. The import substitution assisted by such funds and the chronic indebtedness have (by forcing deflation on governments obliged to seek more foreign exchange) choked off potential demand for the industrialised countries ' surplus products.

Another factor has been the industrialisation strategy pursued in lowincome countries. From import substitution, many turned to export-oriented industrialisation in the 1970s, governments providing subsidies, infant industry protection, free trade zones, tax waivers and low-cost credit, ironically assisted by aid and loans from industrialised countries. But while this may have led to a substitution of jobs there for those in OECD countries, the industrialisation strategy has also tended to raise open unemployment. Surplus has been transferred from agriculture to manufacturing, laboursaving investments have been encouraged by factors mentioned earlier, and the rural poor have been driven off the land to form a low-cost labour reserve in and around the urban centres of industry. In the process, multinationals have been able to restructure jobs more effectively, because in industrialised countries the growing technical division of labour has involved widespread de-skilling, a process that has always caused defensive reactions from threatened workers. It benefits firms if they can shift to where the labour force has less sense of "relative deprivation" in semi-skilled work.

This has been illustrated by a steady "fØminisation" of employment, with many more jobs being allocated to women, whether in textiles, electronics, clerical work or many other types of job. In textiles, female employment has grown in the developing world (e.g. India and Hong Kong), though many women textile workers in industrialised countries have become unemployed, if not forced out of the labour force in discouragement. In electronics, the vast majority of production jobs have been geared to women, the work being narrow, low-skilled, low-paid and unsustainable for most workers for more than two or three years. In clerical and service jobs, " social innovations" of the post-industrial type discussed later have encouraged a relative growth of female employment almost everywhere.

In sum, recent process and product innovations have facilitated a shift of labour-intensive industries to low-income countries, where wage and fixed non-wage labour costs are low, workers are easily replaced from a vast pool of underemployed rural and urban poor, effective trade unions are rare and employers' preferences for filling semi-skilled "static" jobs are most easily met from a docile workforce accustomed to subordinate roles, as found in south-east Asian countries in particular.

The shift of labour-intensive industries has been coupled with an expansion in industrialised countries of high-technology industries, such as chemicals, electrical engineering and petroleum products. These have generated fewer jobs. But there have also been more process innovations in traditional labour-intensive industries, partly in response to growing competition from industrialising countries. These have presumably lowered costs and raised quality, but they have also led to further labour displacement. 35

At this point, one should consider the policies of OECD countries, recalling that job losses associated with technological change should be called "true" technological unemployment only if constraints to demand-management policies prevent governments from restoring full or near-full employ-

ment. In that context, the trend of OECD policies almost suggests "beggarmy-neighbour automation". Faced with a fall in world trade and monetarist deflation, governments have attempted to encourage automation and product innovation. From the late 1970s, if not earlier, inflation-control deflation surely caused technological slowdown, leading to an acceleration in the "catch-up" of industrialising countries, thereby worsening OECD countries' unemployment, which discouraged R and D expenditure there (that being one of the easiest activities to cut in recessions). This increased import penetration, which reflects innovations and relative factor costs. In response, governments of OECD countries have attempted to increase competitiveness through subsidies and tax waivers to encourage automation, a policy one might call "financial protectionism". Thus in the United Kingdom the Department of Trade and Industry, through the 1982 Industrial Development Act, stepped up attempts to get industries to automate through "pump priming". It switched to helping small high-technology firms, supported "flexible manufacturing systems", subsidised robot development schemes and by other means encouraged capital-labour substitution, in response to foreign competition, in effect encouraging capital-intensive manufacturing as a means of combating labour displacement.

Similarly, industry ministers of EEC countries recently agreed on proposals to assist high-technology development in the EEC, through information technology, telecommunications and bio-technology, ostensibly to catch up with the United States and Japan. 36 Yet the search for European competitiveness could intensify capital-labour substitution and premature obsolescence of equipment, with the sort of investment-discouraging effects noted earlier.

Deflationary monetary and fiscal policies - particularly "stop-go" policies, which lower long-term expected returns as investors anticipate deflation - have contributed to the technological "lag", which has worsened balance-of-payments deficits and encouraged governments to deflate to reduce imports and encourage exports. But since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and the start of the era of floating exchange rates, trade imbalances due to "technological lag" have led to easier devaluation, alleviating the pressure to innovate exerted by rising production costs. And thus floating exchange rates may have made appropriate technological change less likely.

In examining links between technological change and the international distribution of unemployment, one must also consider trade policies. It is worth recalling that, for instance, in the eras when the United Kingdom and Japan achieved technological prominence they had considerable tariff and non-tariff protection. Whatever the Ricardian arguments in favour of free trade, its impact on technological change is unclear. In some countries low tariffs, in encouraging imports, have induced competitive reactions entailing the use of more sophisticated technology to raise product quality, leading to capital-labour substitution. 37 Low tariffs encourage competitive adoption of

high technology, so that the latest sophistications are adopted despite local factor prices. Indeed, in a more "interdependent" global market economy, world factor prices increasingly determine local technical choice, which might mean that selective protection would increase national technological options.

Another policy designed to offset the "technology diffusion" process has been real wage cuts. Unions have been blamed for allegedly raising wages above a "clearing" level, or policy-makers have been blamed for supposedly letting them do so. This has led to attempts to curb unions and to proposals to cut unemployment benefits in order to force unions to accept wage restraint, even wage cuts. 38 As wages are higher than in industrialising economies and as productivity differentials do not compensate to the extent that they did, "wage cuts" has become a popular cry. This raises the prospect of "beggarmy-neighbour wage cuts", with thØ likelihood that to the extent wages are cut in OECD countries, stagnating demand will persist without much effect on the international distribution of unemployment. Only if wage cuts raised the profit rate would investment tend to increase, and that would not occur unless expected demand from wàge-earning consumers also picked up. Wage cuts are surely not the panacea their advocates claim.

Another "policy" response to the changing international division of labour and growth of unemployment is increased arms expenditure, a feature of which is that it is not subject to the demand saturation that constrains other industrial growth. World military expenditure, R and D and employment in the armed forces have all been rising for over 20 years. 39 And technological advances there strongly influence those in other industries.

## VIII. Long-term trends

Other long-term tendencies have raised the prospect of technological unemployment. For classical economists, any slackening of technical progress accelerated the long-term trend towards a stagnant economy. In the early twentieth century, it was claimed there was a long-term "retardation" of technical progress, with Wolf citing diminishing returns, increasing costs and resistance to innovations, and Kuznets depicting an industry life-cycle process, whereby improvements were gradually exhausted while the elasticity of demand to cost reductions fell as "luxuries" became "necessities". At the same time, Rosa Luxemburg held that technical progress and capital accumulation proceeded faster than population growth or the purchasing power of the population, many of whom were displaced by machinery. For Luxemburg, though resulting underconsumption was offset by increased exports, a lack of growing markets created international tension. For Keynes, there was a secular decline in the marginal efficiency of capital, weakening investment, due to slower population growth, market saturation and a faster rate of technological progress. He argued that to counteract this, the longterm interest rate had to be reduced steadily (not wages, which maintain consumption).

Another view developed in the 1930s was that innovations increasingly become "capital-saving", implying greater cost reduction and labour displacement for given investment. Whether this could be offset by "capitalwidening", that is by freeing investment elsewhere, depends presumably on expected profits, which links back to Keynesian issues.

A more recent theme has been the trend towards a "post-industrial society", characterised by shrinking manufacturing employment and an expected growth in service employment. This has raised the prospect of postindustrial technological unemployment and "de-industrialisation". These themes have their origins in the work of Hobson, who depicted labour displacement by machines being only temporarily offset by labour growth in machine-making, coupled with more jobs in distributive trades and growing dependence on employment in services. As services depend on fashions, he saw employment becoming "more unstable, more precarious of tenure, and more fluctuating in market value". 40 Since then, much of the services expansion has been in the public sector, and government has commonly become the largest employer. Taxes have had to rise, encouraging wage claims to maintain living standards, which played a part in the inflation of the 1970s. Wage claims to match inflation have been common among public service workers, who have had little scope to raise productivity. This has led to additional claims on public resources, and to "the fiscal crisis of the State ". î, 4 One could argue that this emanates from technological change, as productivity growth in manufacturing has been a major factor in the growth of tertiary sector employment. That should not be exaggerated, however, for to some extent productivity growth has been matched by increased demand for manufactured goods. But as services have become the main source of new jobs in most industrialised countries in the wake of the changing international division of labour in manufacturing and agriculture, the slowdown in service employment growth in Europe in the 1970s was linked to rising unemployment there.

However, long-run technological change has been associated with both inter-sectoral shifts - a decline in agricultural jobs, then in manufacturing jobs - and intra-sectoral shifts, involving something like job polarisation in manufacturing: a growth of professional, technical, clerical and semi-skilled jobs, along with a decline in skilled manual jobs. This implies technologically induced occupational unemployment.

Within industries, there have been shifts to service occupations. These have attracted women into the labour force, and have been geared to women workers. They have commonly been part time or have allowed for jobsharing and dual job-holding, being relatively suitable for those combining a labour force activity with some other role. A consequence has been a substitution of women for men, a rise in the relative unemployment of youth - those seeking full-time career jobs - and of older workers whose skills are obsolescent. To call the associated unemployment structural would be a misnomer, for it has involved redistribution of joblessness, in part reflecting the influx of labour force entrants due to the changing nature of jobs.

A related development is the projected fall in office employment, due in part to integrated automation of production that is expected to reduce office co-ordination tasks. Some expect information technology (IT) to lead to smaller offices, so restructuring the division of labour and displacing workers. But IT may result in consolidation of offices and office-sharing by firms, as well as contracting out of clerical services, an "electronic cottage industry", more use of casual workers, and more part-time work, so enabling more women and older workers to be in the labour force (even if unrecorded) and creating technologically induced unemployment of those seeking full-time jobs.

There also seems to have been a decline in consumer-oriented "marketed" services and an expansion in intermediate "producer" services. 42 But a recent trend is that social and process innovations have encouraged "selfservices", making many market-supplied services household matters. Such innovations have thereby displaced many service jobs, and promise to do so to a greater degree. Will jobs in "new intermediate consumer services" offset that? Will the new range of consumer products associated with IT generate jobs on a massive scale ?

If more goods are supplied to enable consumers to perform "service labour" themselves, workers will perform unpaid part of what was paid employment. This social innovation implies indirect labour displacement. The growing use of consumer goods for self-services, partly due to a fall in the price of goods relative to services, means that demand for consumer goods has not decreased, as predicted by some post-industrial society scenarios. The decline in manufacturing jobs in OECD countries has reflected productivity growth and the changing international division of labour, not Engel's curve effects. Meanwhile, marketed services have stagnated, only partially compensated by growing demand for intermediate services in manufacturing and a growth in non-marketed (public) services. 43 In short, innovations have opened up the prospect of "jobless growth" in the very sector expected to absorb labour displaced in manufacturing, just as that had earlier absorbed labour released from agriculture.

## IX. Concluding remarks

The links between technological change and unemployment are such that the notion of technological unemployment is hard to define satisfactorily. But those who dismiss the possibility that technological innovations raise unemployment are being dogmatic. It is essential to take a more disaggregated approach. As such, one can identify conceptually true technological unemployment, asv/ellasfrictional, saturation, occupational and international technological unemployment. It is debatable whether the existence or extent of any of these could be estimated. But in the 1970s and early 1980s low economic growth in OECD countries and elsewhere coexisted with a shift of manufacturing production and jobs away from Western Europe and North

America. Rather than industrialised countries shifting steadily from manufacturing to service employment, growth of marketed-consumer service and public-service employment slowed, partially offset by more jobs in intermediate-producer services and the "tertiarisation" of manufacturing. The growth of self-servicing has also helped create the prospect of jobless growth, in the absence of policies to stimulate aggregate demand and institute "social innovations" to restore employment and perhaps alter the allocation of time between labour force work, self-servicing, learning and leisure. But, however defined, technological unemployment is ultimately a social phenomenon, allowed to persist by institutional inflexibilities and social inertia.

## Notes

- 1 In the 1930s useful contributions were published in the Review. See, for instance, E. Lederer: "Technical progress and unemployment", in International Labour Review, July 1933, pp. 1-25; F. Sternberg: "Prolonged unemployment, technical progress and the conquest of new markets", ibid., Oct. 1937, pp. 446-485.
- 2 See, for instance, J. P. Fitoussi and N. Georgescu-Roegen: "Structure and involuntary unemployment", in E. Malinvaud and J. P. Fitoussi (eds.) : Unemployment in Western countries, Proceedings of a conference held by the International Economic Association at Bischenberg, France (London, Macmillan, 1980), pp. 206-226.
- 3 See, for instance, interview with Mr. Len Murray, General Secretary of the British Trades Union Congress, in The Guardian (London), 26 Aug. 1983.
- 4 For assessments of the criteria and assumptions used to define these, see G. Standing: "The notion of voluntary unemployment", in International Labour Review, Sep.-Oct. 1981, pp. 563-579 ; idem : "The notion of structural unemployment", ibid.. Mar.-Apr. 1983, pp. 137153.
- 5 G. Mensch: Stalemate in technology: Innovations overcome the depression (Cambridge, Massachusetts, Ballinger Publishing Co., 1979), p: 47. Some refer to social innovations, which embrace non-technical innovations. A. K. Graham and P. M. Senge: "A long-wave hypothesis of innovation", in Technological Forecasting and Social Change (New York), Vol. 17, No. 4, 1980, pp. 283-311.
- 6 It seems that, compared with the United States, Japanese industry has performed well on process innovations. D. A. Garvin: "Quality on the line", in Harvard Business Review (Boston, Massachusetts), Sep.-Oct. 1983.
- 7 Mensch, op. cit., p. 57.
- 8 Hicks classified inventions in this way, defining labour-saving innovations as those increasing the marginal net product of labour (MLP) more than that of capital (MCP). Neutral changes increase both in the same proportion, capital-saving changes increase MCP more than MLP. J. R. Hicks: The theory of wages (London, Macmillan, 2nd ed., 1963), pp. 121 ff. Conceptual difficulties have centred on Hicks's "internal equilibrium" condition, and what is to be held constant. More consideration should surely be given to raw material-saving technological change, which may be indirectly labour-saving.
- 9 ibid., p. 125.
- 10 B. Jordan: Moss unemployment and the future of Britain (Oxford, Blackwell, 1982), pp. 99-100.
- 11 A. Smith: An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations (New York, Modern Library, 1937), p. 260.
- 12 Say also believed machines would reduce opportunities for manual workers and increase those for "intellectual" workers, implying the possibility of a type of "structural" unemployment. A. Gourvitch: Survey of economic theory on technological change and employment (New York, A. M. Kelley, 1940), pp. 47-48.

- 13 Malthus's view was that machines led to overproduction of goods that could not be consumed, whereas Ricardo 's was that machines reduced the population's ability to maintain aggregate demand.
- 14 C. M. Cooper and J. Clark : Employment, economics and technology (Sussex, Wheatsheaf Books, 1982), p. 85.
- 15 The simple logic of the theory can blind even the best. In 1930 Beveridge dismissed the possibihty that there was technological unemployment on the grounds that wages were not falling. Cited in Gourvitch, op. cit., p. 82.
- 16 ibid., p. 194.
- 17 A current example is the OECD. See also S. Brittan: "The interest rate market", in Financial Times (London), 22 Sep. 1983. For the 1930s see, for instance, Hicks, op. cit. ; N. Kaldor: "A case against technical progress?", in Económica (London), May 1932, pp. 180196.
- 18 Some economists have argued that unions maintain real wages and limit capital-labour substitution.
- 19 C. Freeman, J. Clark and L. Soete : Unemployment and technical innovation (London, Frances Pinter, 1982), p. 74.
- 20 Cooper and Clark, op. cit., pp. 31-32.
- 21 This has led some to argue that technical inflexibilities in the face of changing relative prices have led to premature scrapping of equipment and lower expected returns, reducing investment and raising unemployment.
- 22 Freeman et al., op. cit., p. 190.
- 23 Thus Marshall contended that in a competitive environment, firms "could not afford to spend as much on improving methods of production and the machinery used in it, as a single large firm which knew that it was certain itself to reap the whole benefit of any advance it made". A. Marshall: Principles (London, Macmillan, 1920), p. 48.
- 24 Sternberg, op. cit.
- 25 In Indonesia firms substituted machines for labour because they were easier to manage and because the machines appealed to the engineers' "aesthetic" tastes. See L. T. Wells: Economic man and engineering man: Choice of technology in a low-wage economy (Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University, Center for International Affairs, 1972). For similar findings in Brazil and Pakistan see R. S. Newfarmer and L. C. Marsh: "Foreign ownership, market structure and industrial performance in Brazil's electrical industry", in Journal of Development Economics (Amsterdam), Feb. 1981, pp. 47-75; and L. J. White: "Appropriate technology, x-inefficiency and a competitive environment: Some evidence from Pakistan", in Quarterly Journal of Economics (New York), Nov. 1976, pp. 575-589.
- 26 J. A. Schumpeter: Business cycles, A theoretical, historical and statistical analysis of the capitalist process (New York, McGraw Hill, 1939), p. 515.
- 27 Mensch, op. cit.
- 28 E. Mandel: "Explaining long waves of capitalist development", in Futures (Guildford), Aug. 1981, p. 336.
- 29 Technology gap trade theories were developed as alternatives to factor cost theories. See, for instance, G. Hufbauer: Synthetic materials and the theory of international trade (Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1966). A technology gap arises because innovations "cluster" and because of dynamic economies of scale, technological leadership giving experience that inhibits followers. C. Freeman: "Technical innovation and British trade performance", in F. Blackaby (ed.) : De-industrialisation (London, Heinemann, 1979), p. 57.
- 30 "International equihbrium" might not be restored by a realignment of exchange rates, especially if exports embodying the new technology had a low price elasticity of demand.
- 31 B. Lamborghini and C. Antonelli: The impact of electronics on industrial structures and firms ' strategies (Paris, OECD, 1979) ; J. M. Blair : Economic concentration : Structure, behavior and public policy (New York, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972).
- 32 It has been claimed that labour-saving technological change has reduced the importance of "wage costs" so that "the competitive advantage enjoyed by the low-wage countries necessarily diminishes". W. Leontief: "Technological advance, economic growth and income distribution", in Population and Development Review (New York), Sep. 1983, p. 408. But if

process jobs become more sigmficant than craft labour a reduction in numbers of workers required could still favour the low-wage countries. Moreover, non-wage labour costs are much greater in industrialised countries, as are the transfer payments required to maintain the surplus population, implying higher (corporate) taxes.

- 33 One example is shipbuilding. In 1973 Japan was the largest producer, followed by seven European countries headed by Sweden ; in 1982 the second largest producer after Japan was the Republic of Korea, which had no shipbuilding industry in 1970. Sweden's shipbuilding fell by five-sixths. Financial Times, 1 Nov. 1983.
- 34 ILO : Contract labour in the clothing industry. Report II, Second Tripartite Technical Meeting for the Clothing Industry, Geneva, 1980.
- 35 Industries threatened by foreign competition showed the greatest increase in capital intensity and job losses. C. Soutter: "Investment and employment on the assumption of slower growth", in OECD: Structural determinants of employment and unemployment (Paris, 1979), Vol. II, pp. 131-164.
- 36 This is known as ESPRIT (European Strategic Programme for Research and Development in Information Technologies).
- 37 D. J. C. Forsyth: "Government policy, market structure and choice of technology in Egypt", in J. James and S. Watanabe (eds.): Technology, institutions and government policies (forthcoming).
- 38 See, for instance, P. Minford: Unemployment: Cause and cure (Oxford, Martin Robertson, 1983).
- 39 R. L. Sivard: World military and social expenditures, 1982 (Leesburg, Virginia, World Priorities, 1982), p. 7 and passim.
- 40 J. A. Hobson: The evolution of modem capitalism (New York, Scribner, 1926), p. 334.
- 41 J. O'Connor: The fiscal crisis of the State (New York, St. James Press, 1973); A. R. Thatcher: "Labour supply and employment trends", in Blackaby, op. cit., pp. 45-46.
- 42 J. Gershuny and I. Miles : The new service economies : The transformation of employment in industrial societies (London, Frances Pinter, 1983).
- 43 ibid., pp. 101, 108 and 112.