## The Number Factory: Punched-Card Machines at the Dutch Central Bureau of Statistics

JAN VAN DEN ENDE

This  article describes the application  of punched-card  machinery  for data processing at the Dutch Central  Bureau of Statistics (DCBS)  between 1899 and the mid-  1960s. It demonstrates  that the increasing replacement of manual data processing by these machines was not stimulated primarily by their technical improvement,  but by specific changes  in the bureau's statistical program.  Attention is paid to the influence  of the labor market, organization of labor in data  processing, and the establishment  of a special data processing department,  paving the way for the introduction  of the digital computer. The development of the statistical  program of the DCBS is related to its wider social context.

unched-card  machines represent  an  important developP ment  in  the  history  of data  processing.  Invented  by Herman Hollerith to deal with the American census of  1890, their use thereafter spread rapidly. Within decades they were being used on a large scale for statistical and administrative purposes and  to  a  lesser  degree  for  scientific calculations. Many  business  concerns  and  institutions  owned  or  leased their  own  extensive machinery.  The  punched-card technology formed an  important part  of  the  emerging  information society.

Although  there  is  considerable literature  on  the  technology itself and on the industry to which  it gave rise, the reasons for the use  of  the  punched-card system have  received rather  little attention.l~x  nsight  into  these  reasons  is  necesI sary if  we  wish to understand  the success of the technology. Which  social  developments  created  such  favorable  conditions? James Beniger is one of the few to have formulated an answer to this question. In  his book The Control Revolution he  postulates that  the demand for  information technologies grew out of  a crisis  in the  control of  production, transport, and distribution of goods in industrial society.'  It is nevertheless  worth  asking  if  there  might  not  also  have  been  other reasons.

Another  reason  for  examining  the  use  of  punched-card machines is the fact that the organization of labor in today's computer  departments  is  strongly  influenced by  those  that arose in  the era of  the punched-card machine.  As  we  shall see, data preparation rooms, and forms of  systems analysis and  rudimentary  programming  all  existed  before  the  computer age.

This  article  examines  the  use  of  punched-card machines within one organization, the Dutch Central Bureau of Statistics  (DCBS).  In 1916 this  institution  was  the  first  Dutch organization to install card processing machines, and by  the

Second World War it  operated one of  the largest punchedcard  machine  systems  in  the  Netherlands.  The  machines superseded the manual counting that had originally been the only  method  of  data  processing  (and  which  remained  the method  for  certain  statistical  work  right  up  to  the  1970s). The  questions  to  be  asked  are,  For  which  reasons  did  the DCBS increasingly prefer  the  punched-card  method  above manual  processing,  and  how  did  working  methods  and  the organization of labor evolve around these  machines? At  the end  of  the  article,  I  briefly  discuss  the  introduction  of  the digital computer.

## Keeping count

The Dutch Central Bureau  of  Statistics dates from  1899, although the government had carried out statistical research before this date; for example,  a decennial census  had  been carried out since 1829."  The need for statistical information had been growing from the middle of the nineteenth century. Parliamentary democracy meant that both  governments and citizens  needed  information  on the state of the nation. Moreover, the  industrialization  that  took  place  in  Holland toward  the end of  the nineteenth century was characterized by  growing conflicts between employees and  their  employers,  and  a  corresponding  demand  for  information  on  the conditions of the former.

The government set up the DCBS as an independent office with  the intention of  enhancing its objectivity. The DCBS's work  revolved  around social  statistics:  wages  and  working hours,  unemployment,  unions,  collective  settlements,  and strikes. The bureau also prepared statistics on the observance of  labor  and  safety  legislation  and  on  prices,  care  of  the poor,  criminality, government expenses, and  elections. The DCBS also carried out the decennial census.

1058-6180/94/$4.00 0 1994 IEEE

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, Vol.  16, No. 3, 1994

## The Number Factory

Figure  1.  One  of  the  first  tabulating machines and  its operators.

<!-- image -->

The DCBS always had a great deal of counting work. This was  originally  carried  out  manually,  by  keeping  tally  and counting  by  hand.  For  the  census  the  bureau  temporarily hired a large number of sorting and counting clerks, divided into a day shift and an evening shift. They repeatedly  sorted and counted the  forms according to different characteristics (housing,  date  of  birth,  marital  status,  and so  on).  The counting was performed by two clerks who compared results afterward. Special checking clerks made sure that the others had sorted and counted the forms correctly.

In  the early  years, DCBS employees working  in  its  Population Statistics Department also used buttons and boxes. For each  form  with  a  particular  characteristic,  a  button was thrown into a corresponding box. For calculations, the DCBS bought  simple calculating machines; the first, made by  Burroughs, was purchased  in  1901,

## The Hollerith method

In  1916 the  DCBS  introduced a  revolutionary innovation in  counting  methods:  punched-card  machines,  at  that  time referred  to  as  Hollerith  machines. The  DCBS  was  the  first Dutch  organization  to  take  this  step.  The  machines  were

acquired to deal with the statistics of foreign trade, giving an overview  that  consisted  of  tables  of  imports  and  exports, storage  in  goods  depots,  the  method  of  transport,  and  the throughput per  harbor.  In  1916 the  DCBS  had  taken  over responsibility  for  these  statistics  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance, where they had  fallen into decline. World War I was to be the  impetus in a move toward  better  statistics. Shortages of raw materials meant that the government had to take emergency measures.' ''

The DCBS considered the Hollerith  method  the cheapest way  to  process  the  figures.  Visits  were  made  to  Berlin, where the German National  Bureau of Statistics (Kaiserliche Statistische  Amt) was  trying  out  the  machines  with  export statistics. At that time Germany was at war, but  Holland  had adopted a neutral  stance. In  1916 DCBS  signed  a  contract with Dehomag (Deutsche Hollerith Maschinen  Gesellschuft), Hollerith's agency in Germany, for two tabulating machines, four  sorting  machines,  and  26  card-punching  machines.  A third tabulating machine soon followed. The DCBS chose a 34-column  card,  sufficient  for  the  demands  made  by  the trade statistics, and the cards were printed  specially. The rent payable on  the  machines  was  DM  1149.10 per  month  (not including the third tabulating machine).

It  is worth  noting that  Dehomag was  able to  supply machines in  1916,  because at that time the agency was suffering a shortage of machines. Supplies from the US had stagnated because  of  the  war,  while  demand  for  the  machines  had grown  for  the  same reason.  Perhaps the  answer lies  in  the fact  that  just  before  the US joined  the  war  in  1917,  the American  parent  company  C-T-R  (Computing  Tabulating Recording Co., the result of  a merger that  had  included the Hollerith company and which would later become IBM) had sent a batch  of  machines to Dehomag. Dehomag also began manufacturing  punched-card  machines.' The  DCBS  did, however, pay  a  15 percent  'war duty' on  the  punch  cards. The war may incidentally also have been responsible for the fact that James Connolly's History o f Computing  in Europe incorrectly cites  1919 as being the year in  which  the  DCBS bought punched-card machines.?  His information is probably based  on  American archives in which  the  wartime  transactions with Dehomag do not appear.

Counting step  by  step. Data  processing  took  place  in three subdepartments: the control room, the punch room, and the machine room. Each department had about 20 personnel. In  the control  room  the incoming data was checked and  encoded; in the punch room the cards were punched; and in the machine room  they  were sorted  and  counted.  Much  of  the work,  such  as  the  card  punching  and  the  operation  of  the tabulating machines, was carried out by women. The head of the female staff  was also a woman. At this time an increasing amount of administrative work generally was being performed by  women. At the DCBS the  sorting machines were operated by  men. The reason  for  this  is  probably  that  one stood at these machines and had to bend down to remove the sorted cards  from the  card  pockets; the  machine  was  even nicknamed  the  'backbreaker.'  Both  standing  and  bending down were considered unsuitable for women, bending  being

hampered by tight corsetry.''  It was also a man who repaired the machines and instructed the new operators.

The data on trade statistics came in  as returned customs documents. These  statistics were  prepared  monthly,  and  it was  important  that  the  figures  were  made  available as quickly as possible. For each goods load the keypunch operators  prepared a card recording the harbor name, method of transport, the country of origin or of destination, the type of goods, their weight, their worth, and their number. The code for the type of goods had four figures, as the DCBS, according  to  intemational  standards,  distinguished  among  more than a thousand  different kinds of goods. The keypunch operators visually  verified the data  entered  on  the cards  with the original documents.

In  the  machine room  the  cards  were  sorted according to type of  goods and country. This too took place a  step at a time, in  a 'multicolumn sort,' with the cards being repeatedly  fed  through  the  sorting  machine.  First  the  operators would  sort  the  cards  according  to  the  last  number  of  the goods figure, then  according to  the last but  one, and  so on, until  all the cards were in  the  correct order. The  women  at the  tabulating machines  then  counted  the  volumes  and  the values of the goods by type and by country.

Two  women  sat  at  each  machine  (see  Figure  1).  One woman read the amount of goods per country off  the counters and typed these numbers into an adding machine to calculate the  grand total.  The cards  were  then  passed  through again, this time  to  count warehouse goods  movements,  the method  of  transport, and the transit ports.  So far  as  can  be seen in the DCBS archives, the department processed nearly two million cards per  year.  The most  important part  of  the monthly  trade statistics was prepared during the first half  of the following month, using overtime, with the results appearing around the  15  th of the month.

The  DCBS  continued  to  produce  trade  statistics  after World War I. Although  the bureau  reduced statistical activities in other areas, the government needed trade statistics for the  preparation  of  trading  treaties  with other  countries.'' Moreover, the figures were also important to trade, industry, and  transport firms; these sectors expanded considerably in the years after World War I.

Around  1920 complaints  began  to  be  voiced  about  the punched-card  machines, complaints about poor-quality card material,  the  lack  of  spare  parts,  and  the  age  of  the  machines.  It  is  possible  that  Dehomag  had  been  using  older machines  because  of  license  problems  with  the  American parent company, C-T-R.'6 In  1921 the DCBS signed a direct contract  for  the  delivery  of  new  machines  with  the  parent company in New York. In  1922 a special machine was delivered, at no charge, which checked whether the cards were the correct  thickness  and  whether  they  were  contaminated  by carbon deposits or metal  fragments that  could  cause  problems during processing.

The archives do not make clear how working with the machines  was  experienced  by  the  operators  themselves.  The DCBS annual report of  1925 does, however, make mention of the din that  the operators had to suffer: 'the health  of  the officers at work  in this  room  was not  benefited  by  the con-

Figure 2. The classicompteur.

<!-- image -->

stant  commotion  engendered by  the  machines.'  Following this comment, the DCBS divided the room into two separate areas: a sorting room and a counting room.

A  lady  of  Paris. For  the  national  census  of  1920, the DCBS acquired another new kind of machine: the 'classicompteur'  (see  Figure  2).  This  was  a  sort  of  desk adding machine with 60 keys. Each key had its own counter. By pressing on a key the counter increased by one -a classic  tallying  device.  The  DCBS  again  employed  women  to operate  these  machines.  For  each  census  form  containing personal details, they struck the appropriate key and read off the counters at the end. In  the housing statistics, for example, the number of rooms in the dwelling corresponded to the vertical axis on  the  keyboard and  the  number  of  people  in the  dwelling to  the  horizontal axis.  For  each  dwelling, the key  was  pressed  that  corresponded to  both  the  number  of rooms and the number of inhabitants the dwelling contained. At the end of the process, the totals could be easily read off. Five  classicompteurs  were  bought;  the  French  machines were  accompanied by  a  Parisian  woman  who  gave  initial instruction to the personnel. About  one-third of  the population  statistics  were  carried  out  using  the  machines  and  the rest by  hand. After  the census the DCBS did not use classicompteurs  anymore.  For  the  few  statistics  for  which  they were suited, they hardly offered any practical  advantage.

Punched-card machines in  the  Amsterdam Municipal Museum. During  the  1920s, Dutch  demand  for  punchedcard  machines  increased.  Large  municipal  firms,  banks, insurance  companies,  and  trading  firms  all  acquired  ma-

## The Number Factory

chines. In  1926 the  Amsterdam Municipal Museum held  a large  exhibition  on  business  administration,  where  businesses told of their experiences  with  punched-card  machines.'  According  to  Connolly,  the  Netherlands  was  an important market for punched-card apparatus:

In  the  early  post-war  period  little  Holland  became  an important unit  in  the  computing  world.  There  were  a variety  of  installations  of  Hollerith  and  Powers  machines in a wide assortment of business and government offices.2

However, a big failure also occurred. In 1923 the National Post  Office  Girobank  ordered  $600,000  worth  of  Powers machines, then the largest European order of  punched-card machines ever.* The mechanization was accompanied by  a reorganization of the service, unfortunately ending in enormous chaos. All machines were resold, and the service was closed for a year to straighten out the administration.

In  the  1920s, the  DCBS continued to  restrict  the  use  of their punched-card machines to trade and to no other statistics. Probably the trade statistics had a number of characteristics that favored machine computation:

- 1.  A large amount of basic data.
- 2. A  large  number  of  tables  (both  imports  and  exports, warehouse stock movements, means of transport, transit  ports).  Punching  the  cards  took  considerable work, but once punched the cards could easily generate many different tables. Henceforth the number of tables required by  a statistical process will be  referred  to as its complexity. The  punched-card  method  was  especially suited to complex statistics.
- 3.  The type of calculations. This was adding numbers together, not simply tallying forms, as had been the case in the census. Adding was more work than tallying.

Moreover,  the  reorganization  of  the  trade  statistics  facilitated  the  transition  to  the  punched-card machines,  as  the working methods had been reexamined accordingly.

The complexity of the trade statistics was  also connected to the  number of different users of  the statistics. Industrialists, traders, transporters, and government were all interested in the figures, but each sector wanted to see them set out in a different way: the one interested in countries of origin or of destination for a specific product, the other interested in the means of transport or in the transit ports.  Yet another wanted to see the total import or export figures for one product.

## Increasing mechanization

During the economic crisis of  the  1930s, the government decided  on  a  new  economic  policy.  The  DCBS  therefore expanded the scale of  its  economic statistics, including, for example, an international balance of payments and a census of  firms.  The  accuracy  of  various  statistics  was  improved. Pressure from outside, particularly from trade and  industry, sometimes led the DCBS to publish statistics that were more accurate than the bureau itself  deemed necessary. The DCBS also began econometric research, the key figure in this work

being  the  physicist  and  later  Nobel  prize  winner  J.  Tinbergen.  After a decline during the  1920%  between  1928 and 1939, the DCBS work force rose from about 215 to 560 employees.

During  the  1930s more  and  more  statistics  were  being carried out on punched-card  machines. An important reason was the increasing complexity of the statistics. As has been mentioned, the punched-card technology was favored when many  tables were required from one set of data. This was a two-way process,  for  once the  machines  had  been  used  it was a simple matter to increase the number of tables derived from the data.

It seems likely that the machine cost/labor  cost factor was rather less  important for the  increased use  of  the  punchedcard  machines.  During  the  1930s the  dollar  exchange  rate fell  (from  F  2.50  to  F 1.50),  which  made  the  machines cheaper. However, the price  of  labor  also  decreased  in  the same period;  wages fell  and  the DCBS could  also cheaply employ the unemployed.

The first new  statistical job to be transferred to  punched cards, the 1930 census, offers an example. The growth of the population from 7 million in 1920 to 8 million in 1930 was a reason  for  the  introduction of  punched-card machines,  but more important was the increasing complexity of the census statistics.  For  example,  a  'morality  table'  was  now  to  be drawn up showing the number of families in which two persons, not  married but over fourteen years  of  age and of opposite gender, slept in one room together. The data was to be derived from the given data on the number of rooms in the house, the number of male and female inhabitants, and their ages. A complex sorting and counting procedure was necessary. For the purposes of  the census the DCBS arranged for the delivery of  five ''census machines,' which IBM had  recently brought onto the market (see Figure 3). In one action, a  census  machine  could  sort  according to one  column  and tally the cards according to the data in three columns, including the sorting column. The results could be printed on sheet paper  by  pressing  the  sheet  against  the  counters  (above which ran an inked ribbon).

The data processing was prepared with  the greatest care. The two heads of the census drew up a comprehensive work scheme  in  which  the  data  processing  was  set  out  step  by step. This work  scheme was translated into  a handbook for the machine operators, which contained details about which columns were to be sorted and which  counted for each card run.  The handbook was hundreds of  pages  thick  and reads remarkably like a computer program. Both, after all, consist of a series of instructions to be carried out by  the hardware. However,  in  the  handbook  repeated operations  are  often described in full, whereas in a computer program this is not the  case.  We  would  nowadays  describe  the  punched-card data  processing  method  as  'parallel  processing,'  as  four machine operations (three counts and one sort) took place at the same time.

Complexity  and  the  data  model. The  introduction  of punched-card  machinery was  sometimes hindered by  problems with the layout of the punch card. It was an issue of an

extensive debate about the  mechanization of the business  census, held for the first time in  1930. The Central  Statistics  Committee  (the policy organ  of the  DCBS)  was pressing for mechanization, but the census  organizers  were unhappy with  the  data  model  used  by  the cards  because  the  number  of  data fields differed greatly between different  businesses.  This  applied, for  example,  to  details  of power machinery  (oil-fired engines, petrol engines, wind-powered machinery, steam-powered  machines,  electromotors, and  so forth). Since every machine  could have a different power  source, the  cards devoted  a great  deal  of  space  to  such  questions, vital space which  was inevitably  mostly  empty.  For  this  reason, the business census was carried out by hand.

Ten years later, in 1940, the data model for the business  census was changed to allow punched-card processing.  A separate  card was prepared for each power machine in a business.  The  number  of cards was variable, but the number of data options on each card was fixed. The

Figure 3. The census machine. Left, the sorting device; right, the three counters.

<!-- image -->

DCBS also no longer recorded the exact power  of  each machine  but  placed it into  a  power  category.  The  numbers thereby  no longer needed to be added up, but could be tallied on the census machines. Ultimately the entire business census was dropped because of the war.

Also, skill requirements of personnel  could hinder the introduction  of  punched-card  machinery. This became  apparent in  1935, when H.W. Methorst, the director of  the DCBS, spoke  to  all  his  department  heads  to  promote  the  use  of punched-card  machines.  The  introduction  of  the  punchedcard method  in  the  Criminal  Statistics  Department, for example, meant having to  encode the data. The  problem  was that the encoding had to be performed by trained staff, while counting  the  documents  by  hand  was  carried  out  by  untrained  staff.  The  department  was  unwilling  to  replace  its untrained personnel with trained staff.

Despite  such  problems,  the  application  of  the  punchedcard method  slowly diffused within  the bureau. In  1934 the punched-card  machines  themselves were replaced. The DCBS  replaced  five  sorting  machines  and  six  tabulating machines with  four  faster  sorting  machines  and  three  new tabulating machines. The 80-column punch card, which had already  been  used  for the national  census, was  immediately introduced for the trade statistics.

In  1937 an efficiency study was performed in the DCBS. As a result, the bureau gave punched-card processing its own separate  department,  initially  simply  a  subsection of  the

Trade  Statistics Department.  Until  that  moment,  only  this department  and  the  Population  Statistics  Department  had their own machines; the other departments 'borrowed' them. Centralizing the  machines was an attempt to improve their efficiency and their accessibility to the other departments. In the efficiency study, the routing of the data was also investigated.

The final stages of  data processing. In  this  period  the number  and variety of machines increased  as a consequence of the mechanization of the final stages of the data processing procedure. In the case of the trade statistics, these stages consisted of reading the results off  the tabulating machines and converting them  into the final press copy. The growing accuracy, resulting in a growing number of goods types, was making  the  work  by  hand  and desk  calculators increasingly laborious.

In  the  second  half  of  the 1930s,  printing  tabulating machines  and  'summary  punches'  were  introduced.  The latter  read  the  numbers  shown  by  a  tabulating  machine and  punched  them  onto  a  new  card. The  machines  were coupled electrically to the  tabulating  machines. The new cards could subsequently  be processed  by  tabulating  machines. The women with  the Burroughs  adding machines no longer had  to  type  the  figures direct  from  the  counters, and sat not at the machines  but along one side of  the machine room (see Figure 4).

## The Number Factory

Figure 4. The machine room in 1939.

<!-- image -->

The year  1937 also saw the installation of the first Dutch sorting machines, made by  the firm Kamadex. Up till  then, IBM  had  been  the  only  supplier to  the  DCBS.  The  Dutch machines were considered cheaper. The purchase price of  a Kamadex  sorting machine was F 3500 (then about $2,300), whereas  a Hollerith cost F 700 (about $450) a year to rent. The  Kamadex  machines were  also  faster.  The  DCBS  held onto its IBM tabulating machines, so from 1937 the machine room had mixed apparatus. In  1939 the national  government facilitated  the  use  of  Dutch  equipment  by  forcing  IBM  to scrap its  'competitor clause'  in  contracts  with  government institutions. This clause had  prevented the  client from purchasing equipment from other manufacturers.

At the end of the 1930s, the DCBS replaced the tabulating machines with  IBM Model  3 s  and  4 s  tabulating machines. These offered automatic control by  sensing data held by  the cards. The machines continued working  as long as the data in a  specific field was identical to that in the previous card. When it changed, the machine stopped, printed the counter figures onto paper  or onto new  cards, reset  the counters to zero, and began counting again.

The war. Between  1940 and  1945 the  Netherlands were occupied by the Germans. The Dutch  economy was, at least initially, left  largely  intact by  the  Germans,  and  the  DCBS continued most of  its activities. In  the beginning of the war period  the institute actually underwent enormous growth. It received  a new assignment: assisting the National Bureau of Industry  in the registration of stocks and rations. In  1941, the DCBS took over a large bureau of statistics that had been set up by the Ministry of Agriculture in the  1930s: 200 staff and comprehensive machinery. The number of staff employed by the  DCBS  rose  to  almost  1,000. With  40  card-processing

machines, the bureau now  had  the largest  assembly  of  Hollerith  machines in the Netherlands.

As  the  war  progressed, work  at the DCBS became more  and more erratic.  New machines  were  delayed and work  slowed as general economic  activity  declined  in  the Netherlands. Many  staff  left  their jobs since wages  were higher elsewhere. Many men disappeared, having  been  sent  to  forced  labor camps or having gone into hiding. The  unemployment  crisis  of the 1930s had  meant  that  many  men were  given  the  women's  jobs  of operating the  tabulating machines. During  the  war,  women  got  these and other jobs back  (see Figure 5). In  1944 work  came to  a  complete standstill.

## Postwar reorganization

After the war ended, work  at the

DCBS slowly returned  to  normal.  In  1947 the  Mechanical Processing Department replaced the obsolete machines. Orders were placed with  the French company Machines Bull, whose Dutch agent was Bullatec, the erstwhile Kamadex. At this  time  there  were  about  40  punched-card machines,  a number  that  would  grow  to  about  60  in  the  1950s.  The equipment included sorting machines, tabulators, reproducers, summary punches, and collators, which merged decks of sorted cards.  Around  1950 the  Mechanical Processing Department had a staff of close to 200.

As a result of  the growth of the DCBS the director, Ph.J. Idenburg (who succeeded Methorst in  1939), commissioned a study of its organization by  external advisers. In addition, the DCBS set up an internal Office of Organization and Efficiency in  1948. Central to the new office's philosophy was 'functional organization,'  a  concept  that  went  back  to  the 1920s and 'scientific management.' It represented a form of labor  division  in  which  tasks  of  a  given  difficulty  were combined as far as possible into functional units. An  office was even set up for adding and arithmetic work housing only boys and girls of  14 or 15 years of age.

The Mechanical Processing Department was also reorganized. In  1950 the DCBS  stated that this  department 'forms, with its extremely sensitive apparatus, in a certain sense the 'bottleneck' in  the Bureau's work  cycle.''s A task preparation  office  was  set up  which  produced operational instructions, describing specific processing tasks and the necessary control  methods,  for  each  incoming  assignment.  Assignments  passing  through  the  Mechanical  Processing  Department were now accompanied by an 'order envelope':

The order envelope gives a schematic route of  the machines to be  employed and the tasks  to be carried out, and gives the time planned for each task.''

The actual times taken  for each task were noted to calculate processing costs. Reorganization made certain employees' work  less attractive; some machine operators now  had only to place the plug boards onto the machines and feed in cards. Nevertheless, they  saw themselves as specialists and continued to  wear  the professional-looking white coats  that protected them from card dust.

The directors considered the number of cards processed  to be  the  measure  of  the  performance  of  the  department.  In 1949 this number was  13 million (of  which  only  2 million were  attributable  to  the  Trade  Statistics  Department).  In 1951  calculations  were  made  of  the  weight  of  the  cards transferred between the machines: It was an average of  two and a half tons per day. Remarkably, the performance of  the adding and calculation offices was expressed as the number of  processed figures and  the  length of  the  printer rolls that passed through the calculating machines. In  195  1, 50 million figures were processed, using 200 kilometers of printer roll.

The  Mechanical  Processing  Department  (renamed  the Central  Processing  Department  in  1953)  was  increasingly taking on the appearance of a 'numbers factory.' In  1947 a member  of  staff  of &amp;other department  had  called  his  department  a  'nutn@;mill.' In 1949  the annalist  of the DCBS's 50th anniversary remarked on the 'factory element' in  the  processing work, though  this was in  reference to  the 1916 introduction of the punched-card machine. In  fact, the same  factory  comparison  was  being  made  at  this  time  in other punched-card departments in many  other parts of  the net her land^.".'^

The department went  on  to  mechanize  the  processing of trade  statistics still  further.  In  1951 it  was  able  to produce the final, print-ready version  of  the  trade  statistics entirely mechanically. A collator combined cards holding numerical data and cards holding text, and a tabulating machine printed the tables on paper. The department brought in a new kind of punched-card  machine,  the  IBM  101 Electronic  Statistical Machine, which  worked  using  vacuum tubes.  It  meant  that additional selection modes were possible, and  it could  also be  used  to  search  for  faulty  cards.  Programming  the  IBM 101 was, however, considerably more complicated than programming  the  conventional  tabulating  machines;  the  plug boards  were  sometimes  a  huge  ball  of  wires.  By  this  and other  developments,  the  number  of  consecutive processing operations was constantly increasing, a fact revealed by  the number  of  'intermediate'  cards  containing  partially  processed data. In  1956 there were 8 million of these, compared with  12 million original data cards.

Keypunch operators wanted. The number of  women  at work in the machine department fell once again  during this period. Of  the 30 staff  in  the  machine room  in  1955, only about eight were  women. Nevertheless, the head  of  the machine room was a woman. The cause of the decline must be sought in the tendency  in  this  period for women, and especially  married  women, to  be  pressed  to  devote  themselves once again entirely to domestic work.

The  DCBS  actually  had problems recruiting enough women  for the punching. In  1953, the  DCBS  was  actually

Figure 5.  During World War 11 , women  reclaimed the job of operating  the machines.

<!-- image -->

forced to carry  out a  large assignment by  hand. The bureau did  not  raise  the  low  salaries -a  difficult  move  in  those times of cost-cutting and a controlled wages policy -but it did  seek alternative, technical solutions. In  1947 it  had  already tried an alternative to the punched  card, namely marksense cards. These were cards printed  with  little  boxes that were selectively penciled in, these cards being automatically read  by  a  'mark  sensor.' However,  filling  in  such  a  card took more time than punching an ordinary card, and for this reason  this  method  was used  only in a small number of  statistics. The Dutch Post Office also carried out research into the possibility of replacing the punching process with  a machine  able  to  automatically  read  written  numbers,  but  no useful results emerged.' 2'

In  1956 the DCBS set up a second punch room in the city of Apeldoorn, outside the urban  conglomeration of  Western Holland, where women were easier to find. In  addition, the situation improved in  1957 when  the  Dutch  Parliament reversed  the  1924 ruling  that  had  prohibited married  women from working for the government. In short, this period demonstrates that the whole punched-card method was dependent on  fast  and  cheap  keypunch  operators,  and  that  the  early abundance of women  in the labor market had  stimulated its introduction.

## A glorified tabulating machine

In  1955 Idenburg,  the  director  of  the  DCBS,  asked  the head of the Central Processing Department to investigate the application  of  the  digital  computer.  He  and  his  assistant wrote several reports about the choice of  machine, comparing  different  models.  The  computer  eventually chosen  was the Dutch Electrologica-X1 This was a scientific computer that  had  been  specially adapted  to  carry  out  administrative work.

## The Number Factory

Before  it  was  delivered,  future  programmers,  operators, and  systems analysts  were  trained.  Most  of  them  were  selected from existing personnel with a psychological test. At that time the Central Processing Department had  around 150 staff, 70 of whom were keypunch operators. Those who had been  carrying  out  the  'task  preparation'  work since  the 1950s reorganization now turned out to be the most suited to the post  of  'systems analyst.' It  appeared that  the progressive reorganizations over the years had simplified the eventual introduction of the computer.

The X1 computer was delivered in 1960, and for a while it was used merely  as a glorified tabulating machine. The reason for this was that it was not  yet equipped with  magnetic tapes; its memory  was therefore too small to  carry out  any sorting. To give an example  from the trade  statistics, each combination of  country/goods type needed a  memory  location  if  sorting was to be  carried out. For 4,000 goods types and  150 countries  this  meant  600,000  memory  locations, more than the computer had. So the department continued to sort  using  conventional  machines.  At  first,  the  computer only reduced the total number of  processing runs from 450 to  200; two  summary punches transferred the computer results onto new cards, and these were then  processed  further. In  1963 the computer generated a total of  13 million cards in this  way.  As  the  stacks of  cards had  once been  dragged  to and  fro  between  punched-card  machines,  now  they  were dragged to and fro between  the punched-card machines and the computer.

The  early  years  with  the  computer  were  not  without  a great number of teething problems. Every day brought small but  annoying breakdowns. Moreover, the computer reduced the flexibility of  data  processing; the  systems analysts  and programmers needed to know what was required  of the data well in advance.

One advantage of  the computers over the tabulating machinery was that more validation could be carried out on the raw data. The growing demands being made on the accuracy of  the  statistics  made  this  increasingly  important.  For  example,  the  computer  checked  the  trade  statistics  product prices by  dividing the cost of  each cargo by  its  weight  and determining whether this  price  lay  between  given  boundaries. The result was a printed list of  all the most  improbable figures.  which  was  checked further  by  hand.  An  important saving of  labor resulted, which, however,  was  not  well  received by some of the personnel  of the statistics departments since part  of  their  expertise  lost  its  usefulness. Only  when the  computer was fitted with  magnetic tapes  in  1965 did  it achieve its most important advantage: It could perform many consecutive steps in  one run, since  now  it  also could carry out sorting operations.

The decline of  the conventional  punched-card  machine room  took  longer  than  one  might  have  expected.  The final curtain was not  to fall on the punched-card  machine age  until 1983,  when  the  last  sorting  and  reproducing machines  succumbed. It  is  also  important  to  remember that  the  DCBS carried  out  a  considerable  number  of  statistics  by  hand  up  to the  1960s, before  they  were  finally transferred  to the computer.

## Conclusions

We have  seen  that  the  DCBS  subjected the tallying  and calculating work to increasing degrees of mechanization and automation. Over the years the bureau used three methods to achieve this end:

- 1. calculations by  hand,  with  or  without the  aid  of  desk calculating machines;
- 2.  punched-card  machines,  with  or  without  the  help  of detailed operational instructions or descriptions of plug board configurations; and
- 3.  digital computers.

Two important directors of  the DCBS  stimulated the  introduction of  new  machinery. H.W. Methorst promoted the introduction of punched-card  machinery. Ph.J. Idenburg did the  same  with  the  digital  computer.  The  DCBS  was  very active in the international world of statistics and had a good reputation. They wanted to keep their organization abreast of the most modern technology.

The difference between  manual calculations and punchedcard processing was considerable, because data models, organization of  labor, and the skill levels of the personnel had to  change.  Processing  flexibility  was  reduced,  as  all  the processing steps had  to be established well  in advance, and the  statistics  departments lost part  of  their  autonomy  after the  punched-card  processing  department  was  centralized. Working conditions also changed, sometimes for the  worse -for example, the din caused by the machines.

The computer, on the other hand, followed naturally  from the punched-card method. Every  statistical calculation performed using  the punched  cards could be transferred to  the computer.  Moreover,  the  computer  offered  more  possibilities, especially in data checking. In this  sense, the computer simply meant speeding a process already  in existence, since improved, electronic punched-card apparatus was also available.  The  computer  did  nevertheless have  far-reaching  effects  on  the  Central Processing Department,  whose  organization of  labor had to be radically changed, even though  the creation  of  a  'task  preparation office'  in  the 1950s  had paved  the way  for the kind of  organization of  labor needed by the computer.

In  the history  of  the DCBS there has always been  a relationship  between  the  evolution  of the  statistical  program prepared by  the bureau  and the development of  the machinery used. Up to  1960, changes in the statistical requirements formed a significant inducement  to mechanization  and automation. Four developments were particularly important:

- 1.  the increase in the number of statistics produced,
- 2.  the increase in the size of the database,
- 3.  the increase in the statistical complexity, and
- 4.  the increasing accuracy demanded of the statistics.

In  this  period other factors -such as the changing array of  technologies available, the  labor market, and  labor costs -were  of  less  influence. The  punched-card  machines became faster and more versatile, but the machinery costs grew faster  than  labor costs; in  1925 a tabulating  machine cost

F 2100 per  year  to  rent,  approximately equivalent  to  18 months' salary for a machine operator, but  in  1957 the machine cost F 20,000 per  year, four years'  salary. Similarly, the digital computer did  not bring the DCBS great immediate benefits, in terms of cost and capabilities, compared with the punched-card  machines. The development of the statistical  requirements themselves must  therefore be  seen  as  the chief cause of the increased application of technology at the DCBS during this period.  In  other words, this period  saw a 'demand pull.'

Around  1960, a new force began to stimulate mechanization  and  automation. DCBS  activities continued to expand, but  the  application of  the  machines  was  principally  stimulated  by  the  rapid  improvement  of  computer  technology. (This  can  be  called  'technology  push.')  User-friendliness and  performance  improved  dramatically,  while  prices  fell. The DCBS's use of computers grew, and  it became increasingly easy to widen the scope of statistical activities.

<!-- image -->

uestions can be posed about the societal background of Q the  growing  demand for  statistical information  up  to 1960. Three developments can be mentioned:

- 1. the expansion of government activities,
- 2.  the increasing integration -both horizontal and vertical -of private companies, and
- 3.  the increased degree of  participation by  social groups in the public decision-making process and the increasing degree of consultation among these groups.

The expansion of government activities increased the need for  statistics  on  societal  phenomena.  For  example,  in  the 1930s recession the government began to consider the regulation of the national economy as among its responsibilities (before the recession, the national economy had largely been left  to  free  market  forces).22  As  a  consequence,  economic statistics were expanded within the DCBS. This expansion of government activities  also  increased the  demand  for  complex  and  accurate  statistics;  for  instance,  the  'morality  tables'  were  considered  important  for  public  housing  programs.

The second social change was actually a change in the industrial structure: the increasing integration of private companies.  This  change  also  increased  the  requirements  for scope and accuracy in statistics. In  the Netherlands, the first half  of  this  century  saw  considerable  company  integration.23-2x  usinesses  increasingly  controlled the  complete B production cycle, from raw material to finished product, and moreover  marketed  a  wider  range  of  different  but  related products.  These integrated companies requested more accurate  statistical  information from  the  DCBS; they  needed  it for planning purposes and to monitor production agreements (on  cartels,  for  instance).  This  development  is  central  to Beniger's analysis. As has already been mentioned, Beniger points to a control crisis in the industrial system as the cause of  the  growing  demand  for  information  technologies,  and integration  in  private  companies  did  indeed  bring  control problems.

The  third  change,  the  increased  rate  of  participation  of social  groups in  public  decision-making processes  and  the increased degree  of  consultation among  these  groups,  also increased demand for  statistical information. In  the  1930s, consultation on economic policy between government (particularly  the  Ministry  of  Economic  Affairs)  and  trade

\_

\_

\_

\_

~

## The computer reduced the flexibility of data processing; the systems analysts and programmers needed to know what was required of the data well in advance.

and industrial boards inten~ified.'~.~~ yers and employEmplo ees  entered  into  regular  consultation.  Intense  consultation also took place among representatives of  social groups (for example, concerning labor conditions) and  parties  to  infrastructural projects (such as the new National Roads System). Large differences of opinion could exist among the parties to such consultation that could be diminished by reliable statistical  information.  To  guarantee  that  reliability,  statistical activities were transferred  from  ministries  and  social institutes to the DCBS, which had  an independent status within the government.

As a consequence, the DCBS often found itself compiling statistics on  controversial subjects. Not only the  number of statistics compiled by the DCBS was affected, but also their complexity and  accuracy. The  reason  was  that  each  group had its own requirements of  the data. In this way,  increased participation  of social  groups  in  public  decision-making processes contributed to the growth in demand for computing machines and to the success of the digital computer. H

## Acknowledgments

In  preparing  this  article,  I  used  the  Dutch  National  Archive  (ARA I1 CBS and  ARA  I1 Handel en  Nijverheid). I also used the Annual Reports of the DCBS and of the Central Commission for Statistics. The photos were taken  from the DCBS archives. I have published previously on this subject in  the  Netherlands:  J.  van  den  Ende, Knopen, kaarten  en chips, DCBS, VoorburgMeerlen, 1991.

I  thank the DCBS for its cooperation in research for this article and for the use of the photographs. I am most grateful to  Martin Campbell-Kelly for his early encouragement and later comments on the work. I also thank Anton Nijholt  for his comments on an earlier version  and Ralph de Rijke for translating the text.

## References

- 1. G.D.  Austrian, Herman  Hollerith,  Forgotten  Giant of Information Processing, Columbia Univ. Press, New York, 1982.

## The Number Factory

- 2.  J. Connolly, History of Computing  in Europe, IBM World Trade Corp.,  1968.
- 3. C. Bashe et al., IBM's Early  Computers, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1986.
- 4.  M. Campbell-Kelly, ICL:  A  Business  and Technical  History, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK,  1989.
- 5. H. Petzold, Rechnende  Maschinen:  Eine historische Untersuchung  ihrer Herstellung  und Anwendung  vom Kaiserreich  bis zur Bundesrepublik, VDI Verlag,  Band  41/85,  Dusseldorf,  Germany, 1985.
- 6. T.  Driessen, Von  Hollerith zu IBM,  Zur  Friihgeschichte der Datenverarbeitungstechnik  von  1880 bis  1970 aus wirtschaftswissenschaftlicher  Sicht, Muller  Botermann, Cologne, Germany, 1987.
- 7. A.L.  Norberg,  'High-Technology Calculation  in  the  Early  20th Century: Punched-Card  Machinery  in  Business and  Government,' Technology and Culture, Vol. 31, 1990,  pp. 753-779.
- 8. M.  Campbell-Kelly,  'Punched-Card  Machinery,'  in Computing Before Computers, W.  Aspray,  ed., Iowa  State  Univ. Press, Ames, Iowa, 1990, pp.  122-1  55.
- 9. J.R.  Beniger, The Control  Revolution, Technological and  Economic Origins of  the Information SocieQ, Harvard  Univ.  Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1986.
- 10. I.H. Stamhuis, 'Cijfers en Aequaties' en 'Kennis der Staatskrachten', Statistiek  in Nederland  in de negentiende eeuw, doctoral dissertation, Amsterdam, 1989.
- 1 1 . J. de Vries, De Nederlandse  economie tijdens de  20e  eeuw, Fibula-Van Dishoeck, Haarlem, The Netherlands,  1977.
- 12. P.E. de Hen, Actieve en re-actieve  industriepolitiek  in Nederland, De Arbeiderspers, Amsterdam, 1980.
- 13. P.A.  Blaisse,  'De  Nederlandse  handelspolitiek,' in De  Nederlandse  volkshuishouding  tussen  twee  wereldoorlogen, Vol.  2, P.B.  Kreukniet,  ed.,  Het  Spectrum,  Utrecht,  The  Netherlands, 1952.
- 14. De tentoonstelling  op het gebied van de openbare en particuliere bedrijfsudministratie  (TOPA), 3 vols., Muusses, Purmerend, The Netherlands,  1926.
- 15. Annual  Report,  Dutch  Central  Bureau  of  Statistics,  The  Hague, 1950.
- 16. Onderzoek betreffende  de organisatie en  efficiency  bij  het  CBS door  het  Organisatiebureau van  het  Ministerie  van  Financien, 1947-1948, afdeling  Comptabiliteit, p.  32,  Dutch  National  Archive, ARA I1 CBS 67.
- 17. P. de Jager,  'Het rekencentrum,' Omschakelen naar Automatie, Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands,  1960.
- 18. R.  Romeny  and J. van  Vaalen,  'Shell's  eigen  Grace  Hopper,' Tijd.schrift Vrouwen en Informatica, Vol. 3, No. 9, Mar.  1989, pp. 7-10, and No. IO, June 1989, pp. 9-13, \_.
- L.  Kosten, R.M.M.  Oberman, and H. Reinoud,  'Enige Aspecten van de Electronische Verwerking van Administratieve Gegevens,' De Accountant, Vol. 63, No.  I, Sept. 1956,  pp. 5-85.
- D.  de  Wit, Stup  voor  Stup,  De  automatisering van  de  Postcheque- en  Girodienst, thesis,  business  history,  Rotterdam,  The Netherlands, 1988.
- 21 E. Kranakis,  'Early  Computers in  the  Netherlands,' CWI  Quurterly, Vol.  I ,  No. 4, Dec.  1988,  pp. 61-84.
- 22 J.L.  van  Zanden  and  R.T. Griffiths, Economische  geschiedenis van  Nederland in  de  20e  eeuw, Het  Spectrum,  Utrecht,  The Netherlands, 1989.
- 23. A.D. Chandler, The Visible  Hand: The Managerial  Revolution in American  Business, Harvard  Univ.  Press, Cambridge,  Mass., 1977.
- 24. A.D. Chandler, Scale  and  Scope:  The  Dynamics  of  Industrial Capitalism, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass.,  1990.
- 25. M.  Dendermonde, Nieuwe  tijden,  nieuwe  schakels,  De  eerste vijftig jaren  van  de  A.K.U. A.K.U.,  Arnhem,  The  Netherlands, 1961.
- 26. A. Heerding, The History o f N.  V. Philips'  Gloeilampenfabrieken, Part 2, A Company of Many Parts, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK,  1988.
- 27. P. Lakeman, 100 Jaar Philips, De oflcieuze biografie, Lakeman, Amsterdam.  1991.
- 28. M. Schrover, Het  vette,  het zoete  en het wederziidse profijt, Ar-.~ beidsverhoudingen in de margarine-industrie en in de cacao- en chocolade-industrie in Nederland  1870-1  960, Verloren,  Hilversum, The Netherlands,  1991.
- 29  A.C. de Vooys,  'Wijzigingen  in de maatschappelijke verhoudingen,'  in De  Nederlandse  volkshuishouding tussen  mee  wereldoorlogen, Vol.  2,  P.B.  Kreukniet, ed., Het  Spectrum, Utrecht, The Netherlands.  1952.

<!-- image -->

Jan  van  den  Ende is  a  Dutch  mathematical  engineer  and  has  studied  comparative philosophy  for some years. He is an  assistant  professor  in  the  History  of Technology Unit and  in  the  Technology Assessment Unit of  the Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands. In cooperation with a computer  scientist, he

published  a comprehensive textbook on the history of  computing.  His dissertation The Turn of  the  Tide: Computerization in Dutch Society, 1900-1965, was published by the Delft University Press in June.

The author can he reached at History of  Technology Unit, Delft  University  of  Technology, De  Vries  van  Heystplantsoen 2, 2628 RZ Delft, The Netherlands; e-mall: JvandenEndem wtm.tudelft.nl.