<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The Philosophy of Luddism: The Case of the West of England Woolen Workers, ca. 1790-1809

Author(s): Adrian J. Randall

Source: Technology and Culture , Jan., 1986, Vol. 27, No. 1 (Jan., 1986), pp. 1-17

Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press and the Society for the History of Technology

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3104942

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3104942?seq=1&amp;cid=pdf- reference#references\_tab\_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms

<!-- image -->

The Johns Hopkins University Press  and Society for the History of Technology  are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Technology and Culture

## The Philosophy of Luddism: The Case of the West of England Woolen Workers, ca. 1790-1809

ADRIAN J. RANDALL

Rees's Cyclopaedia in 1819 accounted for the relatively slow ra technological change in the English woolen industry thus:

This was owing in a great degree to the circumstances that manufacture of woollen cloth was rendered very perfect ... l before the improved system [of machinery] was begun; and t were great numbers of experienced and able workmen train for each process who performed their work as well as could done by machine. The reduction of labour ... was in this case that machinery of the most perfect kind could effect; both t were advantages to the public and the manufacturer, but we directly opposite to the inclination and interest of the able w men that we find they have made greater and more effe opposition to the introduction of improvements in the wool than in any other of our great manufactures.'

The vigorous opposition of the English woolen workers "to introduction of improvements" is well known. The most famous ple, of course, was the series of Luddite disturbances in the Riding of Yorkshire in 1812, when the croppers or shearmen en ored to stem the rapid rise of the cloth-dressing machinery threatened their entire livelihood by smashing shearing frames a mills, an action that has bequeathed to historians and the wider p generic term to describe all sorts of labor resistance to technolo innovation.2 But the Yorkshire croppers' violence had been antici

DR. RANDALL is a lecturer in social history at the University of Birmingham a published on the subjects of machine breaking, popular disturbances, and century food riots.

- 'A. Rees, ed., Cyclopaedia (London, 1819), vol. 38, s. v. "woollen manufactur
- 2M. I. Thomis, The Luddites (Newton Abbot, 1970); cf. E. P. Thompson, The Ma the English Working Class (London, 1963; Harmondsworth, 1969 ed.), ch. 14.
- ? 1986 by the Society for the History of Technology. All rights reserved. 0040-165X/86/2701-0004$01.00

ten years earlier in the West of England in a series of disturbances variously known as the Wiltshire Outrages, and it was the West of England where resistance to mechanization was most general and most effective in delaying the forces of progress. There, unlike in the West Riding of Yorkshire, nearly every new machine sparked an angry reaction that frequently frightened innovators and delayed its adoption for many years.3

The reason for the wider antipathy toward machinery in the West of England lay in this region's industrial organization. Here the woolen industry was most highly developed, here the putting-out system, the characteristic organizational form of the preindustrial period, reached its apogee. Here the development of specialist skills enabled the gentlemen clothiers to build up work forces of thousands and capital assets of tens of thousands. But specialization meant that machinery, which in Yorkshire took away just part of the variety of tasks undertaken by a journeyman working for a master clothier, threatened entire trades in the West of England. It is perhaps worth noting the labor-saving effects of some of these innovations. The spinning jenny displaced around nine of ten warp spinners and thirteen of fourteen abb (weft) spinners. The scribbling engine displaced fifteen of sixteen scribblers. With the gig mill one man could do part of the work of a dozen shearmen, while the shearing frame made three of four shearmen redundant. Scribblers constituted around 10 percent of the preindustrial adult male work force, shearmen around 15 percent.4 Such men found their skills useless, their trade superfluous, when machinery was introduced. It is little wonder that their reaction was hostile. It is with the West of England woolen industry that this article is particularly concerned.

Historians have differed in their interpretation of such resistance to change. Some have echoed the opinion of Josiah Tucker, who be-

3For details see J. de L. Mann, The Cloth Industry in the West of England (Oxford, 1971), ch. 5; J. L. and B. Hammond, The Skilled Labourer (London, 1919), ch. 6; A. Aspinall, The Early English Trade Unions (London, 1949); A. J. Randall, "The Shearmen and the Wiltshire Outrages of 1802: Trade Unionism and Industrial Violence," Social History 7 (1982): 283-304. "West of England" cloth was produced in the counties of Gloucestershire, Somerset, and Wiltshire. The region had a long tradition of riotous activities by the woolen workers, who responded to any threat to their living standards with vigorous resistance. See Mann book cited and also her "Clothiers and Weavers in Wiltshire during the Eighteenth Century," in L. S. Pressnell, ed., Studies in the Industrial Revolution (London, 1960); Randall, "Labour and the Industrial Revolution in the West of England Woollen Industry" (Ph.D. diss., University of Birmingham, 1979).

4British Parliamentary Papers, 1840, Vol. 23, pt. 8, pp. 439-441; 1840, Vol. 24, pt. 5, pp. 369-374, Reports from Assistant Handloom Weavers' Commissioners. (Parliamentary Papers hereinafter cited as BPP.)

moaned "the mistaken Notions of the infatuated Populace, who not being able to see farther than the first Link of the Chain, consider all such Inventions as taking the Bread out of their Mouths; and therefore never fail to break out into Riots and Insurrections whenever such Things are proposed."' Even those who, like J. L. and B. Hammond, Duncan Bythell, and Malcolm I. Thomis, have sympathized with the workers' plight have viewed their methods of resisting change as a product of desperation, as "blind vandalism" or as "a throwback to the disorganised activities of a pre-industrial age."6 I have argued elsewhere that this is an erroneous assessment. The violence with which innovation in the woolen industry was met, far from being mere "vandalism," was carefully controlled and directed and used as part of a wider organized response to detrimental change.7

Beyond this, however, as I hope here to demonstrate, the workers' response was in no sense "blind." The woolen workers had a perception of the introduction of machinery very different from the image of progress articulated by the laissez-faire innovators and their advocates. This view was based not merely on the quite understandable special pleading of men threatened with the loss of their livelihoods but also on an essentially 18th-century reading of economic and social relationships, one that placed a premium on stability, regulation, and custom. The woolen workers recognized that the nascent machine economy represented a value system quite alien to this, and they therefore sought not only to combat the machinery itself but also to refute the whole ethic of laissez-faire industrial capitalism that it represented. The struggle over the industrialization of the woolen industry was more than just a physical confrontation. It was an ideological struggle as well.

The case of the woolen industry contradicts the view expressed by Maxine Berg at the start of her stimulating book, The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy, where she writes, "In the eighteenth century there was no 'Machinery Question.' The introduction of machinery was welcomed "as an indicator of economic expansion" that "would contribute to the general 'improvement' of society." It was not, she says, until after the Napoleonic Wars that "this prospect of a harmonious integration of economic and social improvement was thrown into question." As will be seen, this is not entirely accurate.

- 5J. Tucker, Instructions for Travellers (Gloucester, 1757), p. 21. As Dean of Gloucester, Tucker had the West of England woolen workers very much mind.
- 'Hammond (n. 3 above); D. Bythell, The Handloom Weavers (Cambridge, 1969); Thomis (n. 2 above). The quotations are taken from Bythell, pp. 180, 181.
- 7Randall (n. 3 above ["The Shearmen .. ."]); see also J. Stevenson, Popular Disturbances in England, 1700-1870 (London, 1979), chs. 6 and 7.

While Berg is certainly correct to argue that the machinery question became a central facet of the wider "condition of England question" (posed, though never resolved, in the 1820s and 1830s), some of the issues of the industrial, economic, and social consequences of mechanization had already been debated and resolved in connection with the woolen industry long before hostilities with France had come to an end. Yet Berg is correct in asserting that historians have shown little interest "in making connections between [such violent] resistance to the machine and the political and intellectual disputes over technological improvement.""8 It is my purpose here to begin to redress this balance and to indicate the philosophy that informed the machine breakers' actions.

The ideological struggle between innovation and tradition was highlighted in the transformation of the English woolen industry in th years before 1809 because of its peculiar historical development. Whil all workers threatened with mechanical displacement argued for their own protection, the woolen workers believed that they had a constitu tional right to be protected from many of the threatened changes. Th belief was grounded on a body of legislation enacted by successiv governments from the Tudors onward to control the industry that played a key role in the nation's export economy. In 1802 there wer found to be some seventy statutes still extant restricting and regulati many aspects of manufacture, organization, and industrial relations. Much of this legislation was archaic; very little of it was still observed to the letter. But this corpus of statute law and the willingness of Parlia ment as recently as 1756 to interfere directly in their industry encou aged the woolen workers to hope that the old acts might be successfull used to block change and to safeguard their "rights." Thus shearmen and weavers attempted to use the courts to prosecute those who intro duced gig mills and weaving shops and who employed "illega workmen.'"

Furthermore, these trades and the scribblers made every effort to persuade the bench and the wider taxpaying public that their opposition to machinery was based in law and that their opponents were

8M. Berg, The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy, 1815-1848 (Cambridge, 1980), pp. 1, 15.

9BPP, 1802/3, Vol. 5, Report from the Select Committee on the Woollen Clothiers' Petition (H.C. 30). The statutes are listed in BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, Report of the Select Committee to Consider the State of the Woollen Manufacture (H.C. 268).

"~Randall (n. 3 above ["The Shearmen . . ."]), pp. 287, 301; Gloucester City Library, JF 12.9(i), Notice Concerning Apprenticeship of Weavers, 1802; BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, pp. 349, 351; BPP, 1802/3, Vol. 7 (H.C. 95), pp. 44-45; Gloucester Journal, August 9, 1802 (hereinafter cited as GJ).

behaving selfishly and illegally. These tactics were not without success. Hence the innovating clothiers in the West of England were faced with a position perhaps unique in the Industrial Revolution. They had not only to overcome vigorous worker opposition to change-they had also to persuade the local authorities that the past policy of control was fallacious and that it was necessary to ignore all such regulations.

In November 1802 leading innovators in the three counties, alarmed by the strength of opposition and by popular support for the workers' often violent actions, converted an association that had been formed to prosecute rioting shearmen into a campaign to get Parliament to repeal all the old statutes, thereby removing the workers' justification that their opposition was based in law." This action inevitably drew the battle between "progress" and "tradition" onto a national stage on which both sides sought to demonstrate that only their particular case was in the national interest. For innovators and workers alike, this proved to be a costly and lengthy campaign, involving parliamentary inquiries in 1803 and 1806 and much lobbying, petitioning, and pamphleteering. The propagandist battle of the 1790s and before the select committees in 1803 and 1806 gave an exceptional opportunity for the woolen workers to articulate both their hostility to change and their alternative view of their industry and of the society in which they lived. The introduction of machinery into the West of England woolen industry therefore drew into sharp focus the conflict not just between entrepreneurial innovation and established custom but also that between two very different views of the economy and of society.

This is not to assume that there were only two ideologies and that these were distinct and self-contained. Clearly there were many differences and divisions of opinion within the ranks of workers and clothiers alike, as I will indicate. But the advent of a machine economy forced all concerned to determine their attitudes to fundamental questions about the structure, organization, and regulation of their industry. The ideological parameters outlined here are those that the debate itself revealed. Whether or not these ideologies were ultimately proved correct is irrelevant to the purpose of the present article; the fact that the rise of an unfettered machine economy brought eventual national prosperity or involved the total displacement of two major trades, the scribblers and shearmen, is, in this case, of no consequence. Hindsight must not distort our analysis of the perceptions of the protagonists. For in arguing its case each side was doing more than protecting income or capital; each was defining its own view of the nature and legitimacy of

"Gloucester City Library, JF 13.25, Minutes of the Woollen Manufacturers' Committee, 1802-3.

## 6 Adrian J. Randall

society. William Reddy has written of the French textile industry of this period that it is necessary to "recognize how deeply any society's organization of its productive activity is informed by its culture, that is, by fundamental conceptions of the nature of the world and of human relations to it."'2 The converse is even more true-culture and conceptions of economic and social relations are informed by experience of the economic process and mediated by one's role within it. It is the contention of this article that such views are worthy of being elucidated in their own right-and that they provide the only way in which we may really understand the nature of the conflicts the Industrial Revolution precipitated.

The innovators' case for the unfettered introduction of machinery mixed boundless optimism with bottomless pessimism, but its basis was a concept of growth and economic progress. Though modified with time as practice proved some of its larger promises wide of the mark and as the inexorable rise of the West Riding made fcars of total eclipse keener, the innovators' premise in essence remained simple. The new woolen machinery was in a direct line from the spade and the plow. It enabled cloth to be produced more cheaply than before. Therefore it must be introduced forthwith without hindrance. Any region that failed to mechanize would inevitably lose its trade to rivals in other regions and overseas, thereby ruining not only the capitalists but also the workers, who would lose their livelihoods and be thrown onto the poor rates.

However, in the years from 1776 to the mid-1790s, machinery was seen as more than just a necessary insurance against imminent ruin. It would also bestow incalculable benefits. Should opposition cease and machinery be generally introduced, claimed the innovators, "there is a rational prospect that the trade will be rendered permanently flourishing." Trade would be "extended and improved, and the wages in many branches of the business increased." Machinery could not harm the poor, claimed Henry Wansey in one of the earliest apologias for machinery written by a clothier: "If there was only a certain quantity of work to do, and that being done, a stop was to be made, the sooner that the work was done, the worse for the labourers. But the principle of manufactures operates differently. The more you can do well, the more you may." The obvious proof of this was the cotton

"'W. M. Reddy, "The SpinningJenny in France: Popular Complaints and Elite Misconceptions on the Eve of the Revolution," in The Consortium on Revolutionary Europe, 1750-1850: Proceedings, 1981 (Athens, Ga., 1981), p. 52.

industry, exports from which had risen ten times. Machinery would enable woolen manufacturers to extend their trade in the same way, and "besides, new countries are opening continually to the trade of Britain." Thus, machinery offered the prospect of continuous growth. Wansey admitted that there was perhaps an ultimate problem that markets might become "overstocked." "There is a point somewhere beyond which things cannot grow; but it is not for this Kingdom, under the apprehension of such an event one day or other taking place, to neglect the present means of encreasing its strength."'"

While earlier promises of unending prosperity gave way to more guarded statements of optimism in the later 1790s and early 1800s, clothiers throughout the period were resolute in their resistance to any argument in favor of the restriction of innovation. Like John Billingsley, they believed that legislative interference that sought to regulate machinery "would be incompatible with wisdom and justice. To allow only its partial establishment would be oppressive: to admit of none would be ruinous because such machinery with its appendant branches of manufacture. ... is not only susceptible of, but ... will shortly be in a state of migration." A similar view came from a writer from Marlborough in 1794. Restriction was inherently harmful and could only lead to the rapid migration of the clothiers and the industry.14 Indeed, the innovators frequently threatened local gentry that, should any attempt be made to "interfere" with their business, they would immediately wind up their operations and move, leaving their work force dependent on the parish. While such threats did little to endear the innovators to the taxpayers, they could not easily be ignored.

By the time of the select committee inquiries of 1803 and 1806, the case for innovation had taken on more decidedly negative characteristics. In their efforts to secure the repeal of the entire regulatory legislative code-efforts that alienated many small clothiers-the innovators now argued that all such restriction was harmful ("impolitic antequated shackles") and irrelevant ("acts which nobody in the trade can or does observe"). At best their enforcement could only occasion great delay and inconvenience and at worst the total loss of the foreign market. The workers' case in favor of controls over machinery, loom shops, and apprenticeship was scarcely worth considering. Machinery was "the principal means by which we have excluded other nations from the foreign trade." To restrict its use was folly. Even if it did lead

'"GJ, October 14, 1776, May 30, 1791, August 22, 1791; J. Billingsley, A General View of the Agriculture of the County of Somerset (Bath, 1797), p. 161; Salisbury and WinchesterJournal, June 7, 1790, August 15, 1791 (hereinafter cited as SWJ); H. Wansey, Wool Encouraged without Exportation (London, 1791), pp. 67-9.

14Billingsley (n. 13 above), p. 162; SWJ, June 2, 1794.

## 8 AdrianJ. Randall

to unemployment, the alternative would be disastrous, for without machinery the whole industry would collapse. Restrictions and regulations were unnecessary, for the best protection the consumer and the nation could have was the vested interest of the manufacturer in his product. Parliament, they argued, must free the woolen industry from control and "encourage competition and not monopoly." Only in this way could the industry survive. The prospect of universal prosperity was now a thing of the past.15

The woolen workers repudiated the laissez-faire arguments of economic progress expounded by the innovators. In the introduction of machinery they saw not salvation but that very ruin that their opponents postulated as the consequence of the failure to mechanize. Their belief that regulation and control were essential to safeguard the industry was based on moral, social, and economic grounds and was shared by many small employers and paternalists in the West of England and Yorkshire. Their arguments were echoed by workers in other industries facing similar disruption of custom and culture.

Primarily, of course, the woolen workers emphasized that machinery created unemployment. In 1776 the Somerset workers had asked Parliament to prohibit the spinning jenny, since it threatened the livelihood of many thousands of the industrious poor. When thejenny was finally introduced in the early 1790s, these fears were proved correct. It was not, however, the woolen workers themselves who bore the major impact. Their wives and children could find work at the loom or even working the small jennies in their homes. The real casualties were those wives of agricultural laborers for whom spinning constituted a major secondary source of family income and who received no compensatory employment. Many were forced to apply to the parish for relief, generating a considerable ground swell of antipathy among the taxpayers at large to machinery. When machinery threatened their trades in the 1790s, scribblers and shearmen emphasized that countless hitherto self-supporting families would likewise soon be indigent. The general public sympathy accorded to both these groups, even when they resorted to violence, was in no small way due to the taxpayers' realization that, as in the past, the interests of the clothiers and of the community did not necessarily coincide. The workers deliberately played on such suspicions and enmities, pointing out that while costcutting machinery was forcing up poor rates, the price of cloth had not

"T. Plomer, The Speech of Thomas Plomer to the Committee of the House of Commons ... Relating to the Woollen Trade in 1803 (Gloucester, 1803), pp. 88, 9, 25, 26, 23, 35; 14-15; 70.

fallen, a fact noted by several paternalists. "However much the public interest may be affected by machinery," wrote one, "their private interest is undoubtedly advanced."''

In some cases the workers were able to claim that the machinery being introduced was actually prohibited by statute and that the innovators were therefore breaking the law. The shearmen continually claimed that the gig mill was proscribed by the Act 5 and 6 Edward VI, ch. 22, "An Act for the putting down of gig mills." The clothiers disputed this, and the act was sufficiently vague to ensure that cases brought by the Wiltshire shearmen against gig mill owners came to nothing. Under 2 and 3 Philip and Mary, ch. 11, which prohibited clothiers from owning more than one loom or letting looms for hire, weavers were able to bring actions against clothiers for establishing loom shops. They also commenced actions against the nonapprenticed workers who were employed by such men."

The woolen workers were certainly well aware of the old legislation. Nevertheless, they did not intend that the law should necessarily be enforced to the letter; the crucial factor was how custom had interpreted it. For example, while both shearmen and weavers wanted to enforce apprenticeship legislation, this did not mean that they insisted on formal indentures for the seven years. A worker "brought up in the trade" by his father or by a relation was regarded as a legal worker by the community, if not strictly so in law. Indeed, the weavers made it clear that they wanted the law to impinge only on persons coming into the trade in later life without this same kind of schooling in the industry.

Again, while in Wiltshire any use of the gig mill was seen as being strictly illegal, in Gloucestershire the gig mill was regarded as being morally legal, if not in fact so, when used on coarse cloth. It had been thus used for a very long time, so that custom had assimilated its presence into the work style of the community. The increasing use of the gig mill in the 1790s on fine-quality cloth was, however, regarded not only as illegal but as an invasion of the customary moral code. Attitudes of moral law in the acceptance of machinery extended

'6Journal of the House of Commons 36:7 (hereinafter cited asJHC); F. M. Eden, The State of the Poor (London, 1797), 3:796; J. Anstie, Observations on the Importance and Necessity of Introducing Improved Machinery into the Woollen Manufactory (London, 1803), pp. 19-20; JHC 49:599 and 600, 58:352; A Letter to the Landholders of the County of Wilts. on theAlarming State of the Poor (Salisbury, 1793), p. 7. See also D. J. Jeremy, Henry Wansey and His

AmericanJournal, 1794 (Philadelphia, 1970), p. 5, for this hostility to spinning machinery.

"7GJ, July 18, 1796; Public Record Office, H.O. 42/66, Read to Pelham, September 6, 1802; 42/83, Read's memoranda, n.d.; BPP, 1802/3, Vol. 7, pp. 44-45; GJ, August 9, 1802; September 6, 1802; BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, p. 342. (Public Record Office hereinafter cited as PRO.)

beyond those machines actually banned by statute. Randle Jackson, the cloth workers' counsel, argued that while "the shearing frames are not prohibited in the same distinct form of words" as the gig mills, "they are prohibited in spirit and in fact." The weavers' concern over the legislation relating to apprenticeship and loom ownership reflected this view. They were prepared to concede that aspects of the old code were in need of "revision," provided that the "spirit" of the code was retained.18

In a similar vein the workers argued that machinery made inferior cloth. Scribbling engines "tear the wool from its true staple," claimed the Gloucestershire scribblers in 1794, while the shearmen continued from 1794 to 1816 to assert that the gig mill "injures the texture or ground of a fine cloth." Both scribbling engines and gig mills were "driven so violently by the impetuosity of the water" that they could not be adequately regulated. Thus, cloths and yarn were stretched and strained beyond their "true drapery." Such faults could be temporarily disguised but would ultimately show up. Machine-made cloth was thus "deceitfully made," contrary to many of the old statutes, and the machine owners were making large short-term profits at the expense not only of the now-redundant laborer but also of the unwitting customer and the long-term reputation of the trade itself.'" There was some justification for such claims. Machines could rarely perform the most skilled tasks as expertly as could the skilled man. But in the middle- and lower-quality range of cloths, where market growth was fastest, machines had fewer disadvantages. The clothiers, for their part, claimed that machinery would lead to a better product since it would ensure that standards did not fall when rushed orders were necessary.

The woolen workers foresaw that the introduction of machinery would usher in the factory system and destroy the putting-out system. The weavers and master clothiers candidly admitted to the parliamentary select committees of 1803 and 1806 that their main purpose in pressing for active enforcement of the old legislation was to stem the rise of the factory. The Gloucestershire weavers made this perfectly clear in 1804: "It is our wish that no clothier shall erect or keep any

"!JHC 49:599-600; R. Jackson, The Speech ofRandleJackson to the Committee of the House of Commons Appointed to Consider the State of the Woollen Manufacture (London, 1806), p. 30; BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, p. 342. It is pertinent to note that the woolen workers' concern was to maintain only that legislation which protected their life-style and work customs. They did not draw attention to legislation against combinations or concerning embezzlement. But the innovators did not intend to repeal such acts.

"9JHC 49:599, 600; 71:431; BPP, 1802/3, Vol. 7, pp. 104, 118, 159, 215-6; BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, pp. 260, 274, 283, 295, 432; Jackson (n. 18 above), p. 53.

factory for the purpose of carrying on weaving contrary to the statutes, but that we may have the work at our own houses." West Riding master clothiers complained in 1794 that the domestic system "is now in danger of being broken in upon and destroyed by the introduction of modes which have prevailed in other parts of the kingdom which are founded upon a monopoly erected by great capitals and set on foot by cloth merchants becoming cloth makers.""

The case against the factory, however, was not merely an assertion of inertia. Much more important, its proponents had strong economic and social reasons for wishing to stem the tide of the factory system. The weavers prized the opportunities that domestic work gave them to employ their entire families, but the family work unit was valued as more than merely an advantageous mode of production. The weavers all believed strongly in the social and moral values of domestic work. The system emphasized the patriarchal roles of work organizer and receiver and dispenser of the collective earnings of the family. The family wage emphasized the coherence of family life and was supposed to strengthen family ties. The father's control over earnings was generally believed to act as a beneficial check on the dangerous temptations of adolescence. Because the children lived and worked under the parents' eyes, the domestic system was felt to give parents a pow influence in controlling their children's personal development. Pa usually took the major role in providing their children wit rudimentary education, partly from necessity but also becaus structure of work made this practicable."

The factory threatened all of that. The development of scribb and spinning mills was felt to have already shown the trend. Wi Howard, a master dresser, claimed in 1806 that these developme were responsible for "so many boys running about the streets wi any shoes or stockings on and nearly half starved." This was not result of parental inattention. It was the direct consequence o parents being forced to leave the home to work in factories. children who were employed in factories were often paid their wages beginning at thirteen or fourteen years of age, thereby them an unprecedented economic independence, depriving the f of his key role, and potentially diminishing the family income. factory not only destroyed parental control and moral authority; promoted immorality. Although large factories were few in num 1806, it was this supposed result that aroused perhaps the most

20E. Wigley, The Speech of E. Wigley on Behalf of the Woollen Weavers of Gloucestershir Committee of the House of Commons Appointed to Consider the State of the Woollen Man (Cheltenham, 1806); BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, p. 342.

21JHC 49:275-6; BPP 1802/3, Vol. 7, pp. 20, 58; BPP, 1806, vol. 3, p. 309.

rage and anger. The domestic system was the embodiment of morality. Therefore the workers assumed that its obverse, the factory, embodied immorality. "The factories are nurseries always of vice and corruption, and often of disease, discontent and disloyalty." They "deprave the morals of our labourers and break up their happy domestic labouring parties." Randle Jackson, the shearmen's counsel in 1806, claimed that the factories were destroying apprenticeship, "a moral and political institution," and breaking down "barriers which have been interposed to check and prevent early licentiousness." This stress on morality was no mere ploy to impress a government traditionally concerned with improving the morality of the lower orders. It was deeply felt. Even some advocates of machinery and factories were worried by such moral implications and sought to play down the supposed evils. John Anstie, whose pamphlet shows him to be a paternalist at heart, agreed that "it is particularly desirable to keep women and children as much as possible employed at home." But, he argued, while there were some particularly bad examples, there were other factories, "where, by strict though temperate discipline and attention to decency, the most perfect order is preserved.""

These arguments against mechanization and structural change were essentially the moral stance that it was wrong for machines to take away men's work and to destroy their customs and culture. Such arguments might be hoped to appeal to the consciences and pockets of the taxpayers and paternalists. The workers' case was more widely based than this, however, for they believed that there were also powerful economic reasons for prohibiting the spread of machinery. The case was put most clearly by and on behalf of the shearmen and croppers, but it was a view widely shared by all woolen workers-and by many traditionalist clothiers and master weavers too, as the parliamentary inquiries were to demonstrate.

The shearmen, claimed their advocate Randle Jackson, did not oppose machinery in general. That was a "cruel and malignant falsehood." Like "Looker On," a correspondent of the Leeds Mercury, they believed that, in some cases, "Machinery may be called in as an auxiliary to human labour where mechanical contrivance will release [men] from occupations too servile or degrading for rational beings, or too slavish and harrassing to their strength, or abridge, facilitate or expe-

22BPP, 1806, Vol. 3, p. 308-9; Observations on Woollen Machinery (Leeds, 1803), p. 19; Leeds Mercury, March 5, 1803; Jackson (n. 18 above), pp. 63, 76; J. Anstie (n.16 above), pp. 55, 57-8.

dite man's labour, still keeping him employed." Nevertheless, "too much machinery may be applied to wool, and there is a point when it ceases to be useful and where it begins to defeat the very end for which it was adopted." The woolen workers believed that "A trade or manufacture is deemed valuable to a country in proportion to the number of hands it employs." Thus, argued Randle Jackson, "The dispensing with manual labour is in itself a great and positive evil: it gives a fatal check to population and, in the language of political economy, deprives the land of a portion of its customers, a nation's best and first consideration." Such an evil could only bejustified if "the improvement of the article or the saving in price be such as makes amends to the state for the numbers thrown out of work." But none of these criteria applied: "the foreign market is already in our hands, the price unobjected to, and the customer satisfied . . . in such a case there is no advantage to balance its depopulating effects." Hence, machinery would "lessen our home markets more than increase our foreign ones."23

There was an additional reason why mechanization should not be further extended in the woolen industry. Advocates of mechanization cited the growth rate of the unfettered cotton industry, but the traditionalists urged that this was an invalid comparison. As the author of a pamphlet titled Observations on Woollen Machinery wrote, "What might be very great improvements in some branches of trade are not so in the woollen; because it cannot be increased beyond the quantity of wool grown." While raw cotton could "be produced ad infinitum," supplies of wool were limited and already stretched to capacity. "A new large mill can be much sooner erected than additional sheep reared to keep it in motion." According to John Anstie, the most persuasive pamphleteer in favor of machinery, many intelligent persons were convinced by this argument, but it was in fact "a mere vulgar error, originating at first either in ignorance or from design." Anstie drew on customs returns to prove that imports of Spanish wool had nearly doubled from 1791 to 1799, while he cited one of Pitt's speeches in asserting that enclosures were increasing the number of domestic flocks. Yet, not only did the traditionalists view the supply of raw wool as being limited, but their whole concept of their market was that it was a static one, already fully supplied. "However powerful the machinery made use of, no more cloth could be produced-no more could be sold than is already sold." This being so, it was clearly folly to displace men

2Jackson, p. 73; Leeds Mercury, February 5, 12, 1803; Observations on Woollen Machinery, pp. 8, 3; Considerations upon a Bill for Repealing the Whole Code of Laws Respecting the Woollen Manufacture (1803), pp. 13, 14, 35. While this last pamphlet is anonymous, it is clear from its content, style, and remarks, especially on pages 1 1-12, that it isJackson's speech to the 1803 select committee in reply to Plomer.

## 14 Adrian J. Randall

with machines only to sell the same quantity of cloths cheaper. The buyer country's gain was the producer country's loss. Here was the road to economic dislocation and ruin. This theory of the economic value of hand labor and of selling dear was most ably expounded by Looker On. "It is a well known maxim," he argued,

that a trade is valuable to a country in proportion to the number of hands it employs. Suppose then, that wool could be converted into cloth solely by machinery ... it would be little better than exporting the raw material. Everyone knows that the more labour is employed on any article prior to its sale, the more generally profitable. Why then, in contradiction to this plain maxim, seek to diminish the number of people employed ... ? or why endeavour to sell at 13s what would bring home 18s 6d when in all probability all these sixpences lost to the country would not induce the sale of one yard more?24

This concept of a static market and of selling dear abroad was no mere ruse to provide a bogus rationale for resisting machinery. It was a view that enjoyed wide currency throughout the 18th century."5 But the example of the cotton industry-from which the advocates of machinery drew countless parallels, pointing to the potentialities of ever-expanding markets if the product could be made sufficiently cheap-had showed up the weakness of the old view and was rapidly discrediting it.

On similar lines the workers argued that England's preeminence in the woolen trade lay in the skill of her artisans. Defoe, among others, had frequently stressed this point as justification for England's having higher wage costs than its foreign rivals. But machinery superseded this skill and thereby rendered that national asset worthless. Worse, machinery, unlike a skilled work force, could easily be exported. Machinery "facilitates the transferring of the woollen manufacture to other nations." Thus, foreigners would be able to rival her successfully and seize her trade, leaving English workmen to starve. Proponents of innovation rejected this, claiming that, once unfettered, constant

24Observations on Woollen Machinery, pp. 6, 10, 9; Anstie (n. 16 above), pp. 37, 34-5, 36-7, 41, 45-7; Leeds Mercury, February 5, 12, 1803. Observations on Woollen Machinery, p. 5, made the same case.

25For example, J. Tucker, A Brief Essay on the Advantages and Disadvantages which Attend France and Great Britain with Regard to Trade (London, 1753), and Instructions for Travellers (Gloucester, 1757). See also D. C. Coleman, "Labour in the English Economy of the Seventeenth Century," Economic History Review 8 (1956): 281; and R. C. Wiles, "The Theory of Wages in Later English Mercantilism," Economic History Review 21(1968): 113126.

mechanical improvement would ensure that the woolen industry would remain ahead of all rivals. But it is notable that, in spite of such professions of faith in free-market forces, these same innovators were ardent in seeking to uphold and augment legislation against the exportation of machinery.'2

Finally, the workers feared that the rise of a machine economy would polarize their industry into opposing groups of "overgrown rich monopolists" and impoverished, subservient workers, with fatal consequences for the "spirit, energy and patriotism" of Old England. The new large mills that began to appear after 1800, housing not just preparatory machinery but frequently finishing machinery and sometimes looms as well, betokened the rise of a new type of employer, the industrial capitalist, who exercised direct control over all aspects of the trade, not being content, as were the "good honest gentlemen" clothiers, to put out work for wages or on commission. These men, "a small but affluent and powerful association of master clothiers who seek the completion of their fortunes in an utter freedom from parliamentary restraint," would, if allowed, destroy all established work customs and the woolen workers' cherished independence.

Many small "inferior" clothiers and employers shared the workers' fears of the economic power and aspirations of the factory masters and sided with the workers in opposing repeal. "The general view of those who employ gig mills is to monopolise the trade," warned one Bradford-on-Avon master clothier in 1803. Such "inferior" clothiers constituted the majority of employers, although they produced much less cloth collectively than did their "respectable" counterparts. Thus, in Chippenham there were said to be some fifteen or sixteen clothiers, but only four or five were in favor of repeal. John Jones, the spokesman for the Wiltshire repealers and himself a factory owner, claimed that seven-eighths of the trade in Wiltshire supported repeal but admitted that the majority of clothiers opposed it. Yet, even among the more prosperous clothiers feelings were divided. There were said to be some thirty "respectable" clothiers in Bradford-on-Avon, but only four were in favor of repeal." The same was true of the West Riding. Master clothiers there had petitioned Parliament to prohibit such "Monopolies and Factories" in 1794, and many master dressers were suspected of giving covert support to the machine-breaking shearmen and croppers in 1802 and 1812.28

26Jackson (n. 18 above), pp. 12-15; Coleman, p. 281; Wiles, pp. 114-126; Anstie (n. 16 above), pp. 28, 59, 62-3.

27Leeds Mercury, February 12, 1803; Observations on Woollen Machinery, p. 15; Considerations upon a Bill ..., pp. 3, 17; BPP, 1802/3, Vol. 7, pp. 194; 133, 339-40, 201, 205. 28JHC 49:276; PRO, H.O. 42/66, Read to Pelham, September 5, 1802; Thomis (n. 2

above), pp. 63-4.

## 16 Adrian J. Randall

Fears about the monopolistic ambitions of the innovators proved a valuable propagandist weapon at a local level, for they echoed the centuries-old distrust of monopolists in the marketplace and the popular hatred of the forestaller and regrater. In the same way, the workers argued, the innovators' unrestrained greed for increased profits was causing the whole community to suffer. Parliament must therefore reassert the old protective legislative codes and save the woolen workers "from falling sacrifice to the spirit of monopoly, to private cupidity in the guise of public good.""2

In the final analysis Josiah Tucker was only partly correct. The woolen workers were indeed prey to some "mistaken Notions." In spite of their belief that machinery must be restrained, the triumph of "progress" was inevitable and ultimately beneficial to all. This was the line that Parliament chose, the Commons enthusiastically in the two select committee inquiries, the Lords more reluctantly. As the larger clothiers had wished, the old regulatory legislation was suspended in 1803 and finally repealed in 1809.30 Thereafter, resistance to change took a primarily physical form. But the woolen workers were neither ignorant nor stupid. They could indeed see beyond "the first Link in the Chain," and it was toward a future for which they had no liking. Many were correct in believing that machinery would take "the Bread out of their Mouths." Others recognized that it would deprive them of something they held equally dear. The shearmen, for example, knew only too well that no increased work opportunities in other branches of the manufacture could compensate them for the loss of their social status and the redundancy of their one asset, their skill.

Nonetheless, the workers' opposition to change had a wider basis than merely the desire to protect their livelihoods. Machinery and the machine owners represented an ideology quite alien to that to which the woolen workers subscribed. The debate over the mechanization of the woolen industry was at root a conflict between two very different views of industry and society. To the innovators, the vital issues were those of progress and profitability, the need to preserve and enlarge markets regardless of traditional practices and work methods. Theirs was an essentially "rational" economic philosophy that emphasized the liberty of capital to do as it wished with its own. The woolen workers, in opposing this "spirit of monopoly," were in no way challenging the role

29E. P. Thompson, "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century," Past and Present, no. 50, February 1971, pp. 76-136; Observations on Woollen Machinery, p. 22.

3'JHC 58:641-2, 690; 64:368, 405.

of capital per se. They glorified the putting-out structure of their industry and believed that capital, like labor, had its rights and privileges within it. They were at pains to differentiate the "good, honest gentlemen," those who paid full rates and respected custom, from the rapacious innovators. Theirs was in no sense a class analysis. But to them their industry represented far more than just a means of obtaining an income. Their trades were the source of their status in society and the root of their whole culture. They rejected the right of the entrepreneur to throw this into the melting pot in the search for greater profit margins. Their trades were their property, meritingjust the same rights of protection as the clothiers' capital. The economic cake was finite. Capital and labor were entitled to their customary slices. But it was palpably unjust and economically disastrous to allow capital to use its power to seize the laborers' slice and leave them to starve. Ultimately, therefore, the workers held an essentially moral view of economic relationships, a view that, like that of the food rioters, harked back to the old paternalist concept of stability and regulation. Like the food rioters, the woolen workers were to find their case undermined by their rulers' repudiation of such a role and acceptance of the amoral economy of the innovators.