<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The Rising Standard of Living in England, 1800-1850

Author(s): R. M. Hartwell

Source: The Economic History Review , 1961, New Series, Vol. 13, No. 3 (1961), pp. 397-

416

Published by: Wiley on behalf of the Economic History Society

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2599511

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2599511?seq=1&amp;cid=pdfreference#references\_tab\_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms

<!-- image -->

Economic History Society  and Wiley  are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Economic History Review

## THE RISING STANDARD OF LIVING IN ENGLAND, 1800-1850 1

## BY R. M. HARTWELL

I

THE most interesting and most inconclusive debate on the industrial revolution in England has been concerned with the standard of living of the workers, particularly the industrial and urban poor, during the first half of the nineteenth century. In the past, those who have argued for deterioration have outnumbered those who believed that conditions of life improved, and the intransigency of both has resulted inevitably in extreme points of view.2 To a large extent the argument has been, not an objective debate on the interpretation of the facts as known, but a controversy about values, about the desirability of social and economic change.3 Disagreement has stemmed also from the conflicting character of the evidence, which has allowed plausible allegiance to opposed theories; from the facts that there was, for much of the period, no marked trend in living standards, and that the increase in per capita real income still left the majority of workers at a low standard of living, aware more of their unfulfilled wants than of their increasing prosperity. And so historians have argued-often exaggerating trends and over-dramatising events-without feeling that they have done violence to the facts. The exact measurement of the standard of living in the years i8oo to i850 may be impossible, but, eschewing prejudice and pre-conceived theories, a firm statement about the trend of living standards can be derived from the mass of evidence that has survived, and from an analysis of the likely changes in income distribution during a long period of economic growth. This article argues for an upward trend in living standards during the industrial revolution; in section II, from an examination of national income and other aggregate statistics that have survived (or can be calculated or guessed with some certainty), from wage-price data, and from analogy; in section III, from an analysis of consumption figures; and in section IV, from the evidence of vital statistics, from a comparison with eighteenth century living standards, and from details of the expansion

- 1 This article has benefited from the criticisms of T. S. Ashton, A. J. Taylor, E. Russell, C. P. Kindleberger.
- 2 Thus, for example, J. Kuczinski (A Short History of Labour Conditions in Great Britain from 175o to the Present Day, London: F. Muller, I 947 ed., p. i 6) declared that the period 'brought about a rapid deterioration of the condition of the working class', whereas J. -H. Clapham (An Economic History of Modern Britain. The Early Railway Age 1820-r850, Cambridge University Press, I925, p. 56i) argued, for the same period, that 'for every class of urban or industrial labour about which information is available... wages had risen markedly.' Herbert Heaton, however, claims that Clapham can be excused for his 'extremism', for he entered 'a field occupied largely by neoliberal or socialist intellectuals... It took courage, skepticism, caution, and patient industry to breast that tide, to put popular and often legendary generalizations to the test of measurement and proportion.' (journal of Economic History, September I 957, p. 489.)
- 3 See R. M. Hartwell, 'Interpretations of the Industrial Revolution in England: A Methodological Inquiry,' journal of Economic History, June 1959.

397

after i8oo of social and economic opportunities. Briefly the argument is that, since average per capita income increased, since there was no trend in distribution against the workers, since (after i8I5) prices fell while money wages remained constant, since per capita consumption of food and other consumer goods increased, and since government increasingly intervened in economic life to protect or raise living standards, then the real wages of the majority of English workers were rising in the years I 8oo to I 850.1

II

Economic growth implies an increase in per capita national income, and, if distribution leaves labour with at least the same relative share of the increasing product, an increase in the average standard of living. Generally, as the historical analyses of economic development have shown, an increase in per capita income has been accompanied by a more equal income distribution.2 In Britain, contemporary estimates of the national income between i8oo and i850 indicate that average real income doubled in this period, and, although the upward trend was uneven, with stagnation during the war and a possible small decline in the thirties, average per capita income had already increased fifty per cent by i830 .3 No juggling of the figures could suggest deterioration, but the estimates are inadequate both in their methods of compilation and in their statistical bases, so that they can be used only as an indication of trend, and not as a measure of change. This probable increase, of uncertain size, in per capita income becomes more plausible, however, when three other phenomena are taken into account: the increase in the output of manufacturing industry relative to the increase in population; the increasing and substantial proportion of manufacturing income in the national income; and the increasing and substantial proportion of the total working population employed in manufacturing industry. According to W. Hoffmann, the rate of

- 1 See E. J. Hobsbawm, 'The British Standard of Living, 1790-1850' (The Economic History Review, August I957), for a vigorous plea for deterioration. This article is marred, however, by carelessness in the use of evidence, argument and language: for example, the statement that the controversy is only thirty years old, and that 'the consensus of informed and intelligent contemporaries ... took the dark view', ignoring Tooke, Porter, Macaulay, etc.; or the unqualified claim that 'there is no a priori reason why the standard of living should rise markedly under early industrialism', prejudicing the argument by inserting 'markedly', and ignoring a priori reasons (and historical evidence) why the standard of living might well rise under early industrialism; or the consistent use of trough years of the cycle to indicate 'normal' vagrancy figures; or the insertion of adjectives to make otherwise reasonable statements unreasonable -'there is no evidence of any major rise in the per capita consumption'; or the assumption, without any proof, of deterioration - 'Eggs seem to have been of small importance. Per capita consumption can hardly have risen'.
- 2 See S. Kuznets, 'Economic Growth and Income Inequality', American Economic Review, March 1955. Theoretically there may be an increase in inequality in the early stages of growth to allow for larger savings and more investment. This possibility is discussed below.
- 3 P. Deane,. 'Contemporary Estimates of National Income in the first half of the Nineteenth Century', Economic History Review, April I956; and 'The Industrial Revolution and Economic Growth: The Evidence of Early British National Income Estimates', Economic Development and Cultural Change, January I 957. Miss Deane uses the contemporary estimates of H. Beeke (i 8oo), B. Bell (i802), P. Colquhoun (i8o6 and i8I5),J. Lowe (i822), P. Pebrer (i833), W. F. Spackman (i843 and i847), W. R. Smee (i846) and G. R. Porter (i847), supporting them with the later estimates of M. Mulhall, R. D. Baxter, L. Levi and R. Giffen. Her consequent index of 'average real incomes' is as follows: i8oo-ioo, i812-94, i822-114, i83I-174, 1836-i68, i841-145, i846-i60, i851-193. See also the figures (not the conflicting text) of C. Clark, 'The Trend of Real Income in Great Britain', Review of Economic Progress, July 1952; and Paul Studenski, The Income of Nations (New York University Press, 1958), Ch. 7.

growth of industrial output between 1782 and i855 was 3 to 4 per cent per annum (except during the war years when the rate was about 2 per cent) ;1 over the same period the annual rate of growth of population varied from I *2 to I *5 per cent, with the highest rate between i 8 I and i 83 I, and a declining rate thereafter. This, however, would have been of little significance if industrial output was so small a part of national income that changes in it could not have affected the average standard of life. But the contribution of manufacturing industry to the national income increased from about one fifth in 1770, to one quarter in I 8I 2, to one third in I 83 I . Census figures for I 84i and I 85 I show that about one third of the occupied population of England and Wales was engaged in manufacturing industry and that the i85I proportion 'was not exceeded until I951I'.2 In i850, M. Mulhall estimated, manufacturing ind provided ?269 millions (about 40 per cent) of a British national income of f69o millions.3 It is probable, therefore, that by i830 manufacturi similar role as income producer as it has had since I 850, and that the growth of manufacturing output substantially affected living standards.

Of the factors that raised per capita output the most important were capital formation, technical progress, and improved labour and managerial skills. It is necessary, from a combination of those, to explain the shift between I 760 and I 840 from a situation where population and incomes were rising very slowly to one where population was increasing at the annual rate of c. I 5 per cent, and incomes at c. 3 per cent. This could be explained by assuming that the capital income ratio increased from I or 2 to i, to 3 to I (something like the modern ratio), and the savings ratio from 3 to 5 per cent to over I 2 per cent, from I or 2 per cent to 4-5 per cent to keep capital stock intact in a growing population, and a further 9 per cent to increase incomes 3 per cent annually. Contemporar and subsequent analyses of the industrial revolution have assumed such ratios, without quantifying them. The rate of capital formation certainly increased over the period, but to determine accurately its effect on real income it would be necessary to know both the savings ratio and the capital output ratio, neither of which can be determined. Of the various possibilities (a high savings ratio, S/Y, and a high capital output ratio, C/O; high S/Y and low C/O; low S/Y and high C/O; low C/O and low S/Y), however, the most likely up to about I840, when railway investment was becoming important, was a modest rate of savings and a low capital output ratio. Modern analyses of underdeveloped economies in process of growth often assume low savings and low capital income ratios. In the England of the industrial revolution, likewise, the rate of saving was necessarily relatively low in a society where average incomes were still not much above subsistence, and where the capital market w\ as imperfect; and the replacement of men by machines, of wind and water by steam power, and of the home by the factory, marked an increase in productivity that was often spectacular. But whereas the productivity of much new industrial equipment was high, its cost was often low. Thus the comparatively low capital output ratio was not incompatible with rising real incomes. By i8oo improvements in techniques and management were already making capital more fruitful, and it is certain that over the whole period the rate of

- 1 W. Hoffmann, British Inidustry, I700-I950 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1955), and C. Snyde 'Measures of the Growth of British Industry', Economnica, November 1934.
- 2 E. A. G. Robinson, 'The Changing Structure of the British Economy', Econioiiic Jounl, September 1954, PP. 447' 459
- '3 P. Deane, 'Contemporary Estimates of National Income in the second half of the 'Nineteenth Century', Econonic History Review, April 1957, p. 458.

## 400 THE ECONOMIC HISTORY REVIEW

growth of output depended as much on the rate of technical progress as on the rate of capital accumulation, on the quality as much as on the quantity of investment. The productivity effect of better machinery during the industrial revolution was both large and rapid in impact, and the growth of output, because the output-increment per unit of investment was large, was rapid. As Robert Owen declared in i8i6: 'in my establishment at New Lanark mechanical powers and operations superintended by about two thousand young persons and adults ... now completed as much work as sixty years before would have required the entire working population of Scotland'. 1

The employment effect, however, was also potentially large. Many of the new machines required less labour per unit of output, so that, theoretically, the consequent labour displacement could have been large enough to have prevented real wages from rising. On the other hand, because the new machines generally reduced costs, including the cost of goods consumed by the workers, there was at the same time a tendency for real wages to rise. It is because of this tendency, J. R. Hicks has suggested, that capital accumulation in the nineteenth century was so favourable to the standard of living.2 Moreover, money wages were stable between i820 and i850, a period of falling prices, indicating that there was insufficient competition from underemployed and unemployed labour to pull down wages. In spite of pockets of technological underemployment,3 the displacement of labour by machinery did not result in a decline in average real wages. And the existence of groups of wage-earners whose real wages were stable or declining-industrial groups like the handloom weavers, or national groups like the Irish-bias the averages downwards and disguise the gains in the growing sectors of the economy. Indeed, to some extent, the displacement of labour was theoretical: the new machines required less labour per unit of output than did old plant making the same products; but much new plant was an addition to total plant, not a displacement of existing plant, and when this was so, the net effect on the total demand for labour was an absolute increase. Thus, for example, railways did gradually displace canals, but the displacement effect on canal labour was- insignificant compared with the massive labour requirements for railway construction and maintenance.4 There was in this period a continually increasing demand for industrial

- 1 R. Owen, The Life of Robert Owen. Written by Himself. (London, 1857), I, 125.
- 2 J. R. Hicks, Value and Capital (Oxford University Press, I939), p. 292. 'The fact that the things whose production has been facilitated have been particularly articles of mass consumption has worked in the same direction. If there are any goods in terms of which wages have fallen as a result of the accumulation of capital, they are not goods of much importance to the wage-earner.'
- 3 Report of the Commissioners for Inquiry into the Conditions of Unemployed Hand-Loom Weavers United Kingdom (Parliamentary Papers, i84I (296) X), showed that hand-loom weaving was not only a dying trade, but that, because itwas an easy trade to learn and had early relaxed apprenticeship rules, it had become 'the refuge of the surplus numbers from nearly all other trades' and from Ireland, and that 'wages had begun to decline before any machinery was introduced'. Wages were higher and employment more constant in England than in Ireland, but Irish social habits often remained unchanged by emigration. (Reports of Commissioners (15) Poor Laws (Ireland), Parliamentary Papers, i836 (XXXIV), Appendix G, pp. ix-xii.) The Irish, therefore, although they improved their lot by emigration to Lancashire, often provided contemporary critics of industrialism with their best examples. Thus Place declared that Kay-Shuttleworth's horrifying picture of squalor and disease in Manchester in i 832 was based almost exclusively on Irish immigrants. (M. D. George, London Life in the Eighteenth Century, London, I95i e
- 4 T. Tooke and W. Newmarch (A History of Prices, and of the State of Circulation, during the nine years 1848-1856, London, i857, p. 368) estimated that 'the population supported by the Railway Works [in i847-8] was nearly. . . as large ... as the total population employed in the whole of the Factories of the United Kingdom'. T. Brassey (On Work and Wages, London, i873, p. 39)

labour, a demand that caused a differential between agricultural and industrial wages, and a consequent continuous migration towards the industrial areas.1 As a spokesman of the agricultural labourers declared bitterly, 'it is well known that in the great trading towns, such as Manchester, Sheffield, Birmingham, etc., four days work in a week amply supply the dissolute and the drunken'.2

But factories have to be administered, and machines have to be tended, and even the best equipment is of little value without able entrepreneurs and skilled labourers. The industrial revolution was as much a revolution in industrial organization as in technology. Entrepreneurs increasingly centralized production into factories, worked out the problems of factory management, accounting, financing, merchanting and labour-relations. Not the least problem was to change craft and agricultural labourers into factory workers, with their different skills, different rhythm of work, different incentives, different social attitudes, and different way of life. This necessary transformation was certainly painful, but it was gradually achieved without political revolution, and with labour simultaneously increasing its opportunities, its industrial skill and its bargaining strength. The quantitative effect of such changes on output cannot be measured accurately, but they certainly tended to increase productivity.

Ricardo, who regarded economics as 'an inquiry into the laws which determine the division of industry amongst the classes who concur in its formation', argued that the combination of the laws of population and of diminishing returns to land determined wages at subsistence according to the price of corn, and thus limited economic progress because of the tendency of profits to decline as rents increased.3 Thus was established the theory that wages inevitably stabilize at subsistence, which so influenced the early socialists and Marx, and all since then who have cherished the theory of exploitation. 'By the present constitution of society, the millions are a doomed class,' wrote J. F. Bray in i839, 'from the position in which they stand with regard to capital and the capitalist, their condition is unimprovable and their wrongs irremediable'.4 After i830, however, it became increasingly difficult for the classical economists to reconcile theory with facts, and, in particular, with the facts that corn production was more than keeping pace with population, and that real wages were rising.5 Theoretically it is possible that economic growth could result in reduced real incomes in the short run, but it is quite unreasonable to assume, over a long period of a half century, during which per

tells how, in the period of the railway boom, when admittedly the demand for labour was 'excessive', 'look-outs [were] placed on the roads to intercept men tramping, and take them to the nearest beershop to be treated and induced to start work'.

- 1 See E. W. Gilboy, Wages in Eighteenth Century England (Harvard University Press, 1934) and A. Redford, Labour Migration in England, I8oo-go (Manchester University Press, I 926).
- 2 D. Davies, The Case of Labourers in Husbandry (Bath, I795), p. 163. Compare C. D. Brereton (A Practical Inquiry into the Number, Means of Employment, and Wages, of Agricultural Labourers, Norwich, 1826, p. i) who contrasted the 'improving ... knowledge, comfort, and conduct' of town workers with the depression of 'the peasantry'.
- 3 Ricardo to Malthus, 9 October i820. The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo (e by P. Sraffa. Cambridge University Press, I952), Vol. VIII, 278. Even so, Ricardo was conscious of progress, remarking in The Principles that 'Many of the conveniences enjoyed in an English cottage, would have been thought luxuries at an earlier period of our history'. Ibid. Vol. I, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxations, p. 97.
- 4 J. F. Bray, Labour's Wrongs andLabour's Remedy (Leeds, i839), p. 67.
- 5 This difficulty has been extremely well surveyed by M. Blaug, 'The Empirical Content of Ricardian Economics' (The Journal of Political Economy, February I956).

capita national income was rising, that the rich were getting richer and the poor poorer.

There is some evidence that the distribution of income in England in i850 was less unequal than it had been in I 8oo. C. Clark, for example, by estimating Pareto coefficients, reckons that income distribution was more unequal in i8I2 than in i848; 1 income tax assessments of i8I2 and i848 show, also, that the number of assessments between CI 50 and ?500 increased more than those C500; a comparison of fundholders of I 83 I and I 848 reveals that the increase was in those receiving dividends of under ?5.2 These figures, however, are no conclusive proof of a significant change in distribution. In any case, as E. H. Phelps Brown points out, 'the changes in real wages due to distributive shifts have been very small compared with those associated with the movements of productivity'.3 There has been generally the simultaneous rise, at flot dissimilar rates of growth, of capital stock, output, and real incomes.4 Study of the long-term trends in the wage-share of the national income show that since about i86o that share has remained almost constant.5 If this stability has a longer history, the wage bill would have been increasing proportionately with the national income from some earlier date, possibly from the beginning of the industrial revolution. It is not unlikely, however, that the share of wages was less in I780-I 8oo than in i86o, and thus, that wages were rising between those dates more quickly than national income. That this was probable is indicated by the continuous increase over the period of those employed in manufacturing industry. Agricultural wages lagged behind industrial wages, and as more workers transferred to higher productivity occupations, average real wages increased. Census figures show that the percentage proportions of agricultural to all families in i8I I and i83I were 35-2 and 28-2, and that the percentage proportions of adult males employed in agriculture to all male workers in I 83 I, I 84 I and i 85 I were 3 I * 7, 25a7 and 2 I I.6 Further con is provided by the increasing proportion over these years of total population engaged in commerce, finance and the professions, 'a fairly precise measure-

- 1 C. Clark, The Conditions of Economic Progress (London: Macmillan, 2nd ed., 1951), pp. 534, 538.
- 2 W. R. Greg, Essays on Political and Social Science (London, i853), Vol. I, 318-9.
- 3 E. H. Phelps Brown, 'The Long-Term Movement of Real Wages' (The Theory of Wage Determination, ed.J. T. Dunlop, London, I957), p. 53.
- 4 See P. H. Douglas, The Theory of Wages (New York: Macmillan, I934, Ch. VII), showing the close correlation between productivity and wages; also his 'An Estimate of the Growth of Capital in the United Kingdom, i865-1909' (Journal of Economic and Business History, Aug 1930, p. 683). See also E. H. Phelps Brown, op. cit. showing how real wages per worker have usually moved in step with both capital accumulation and productivity; for example, the doubling of real capital per head and real income per head in the United Kingdom between i870 and 1938. A. K. Cairncross ('The Place of Capital in Economic Progress', Economic Progress, edited by L. H. Dupriez, Louvain, 1955) argues also that 'capital and income do tend to increase at about the same rate' (p. 238), and notes the stability over a long period of the ratio between the two.
- 5 The literature on this subject is large, 'partly because of the general interest in the fortunes of labor in a class-conscious society; . . . partly because of an attempt to use the wage share as a measure of the degree of monopoly' (S. Kuznets, 'Distribution of National Income by Factor Shares', Economic Development and Cultural Change, April I 959, p. 55), but no adequate explanation of the phenomenon exists. See A. L. Bowley, Wages and Income in the United Kingdom since r86o (Cambridge University Press, 1937) for basic statistics, and the following for comment on the phenomenon: J. M. Keynes, 'Relative Movements of Real Wages and Output', Economic Journal, March 1939; J. H. Richardson, 'Real Wage Movements', Economic Journal, September 1939; and E. H. Phelps Brown and P. E. Hart, 'The Share of Wages in National Income', Economic Journal, June 1952.
- 6 G. R. Porter, The Progress of the Nation (London, I 847), pp. 53 and 64.

ment of the degree of economic advancements Occupational statistics before I 84 I, except in broad categories, are not very helpful, but other evidence shows that there were large increases in the numbers employed in services-in transport, commerce and finance, in government, and in the professionsbetween I780 and i850.2 Between I84I and i85I the census figures show an increase in services, excluding domestic service, of from 9 I to I 2 2 per the population, or, as corrected by C. Booth, of from I4-0 to i6-5 per c the same time the proportion of gainfully occupied in the population increased, as the under-employed labour of the predominantly agricultural economy of pre-industrial Britain was gradually absorbed into fuller employment in industry and services. Thus, for example, the much publicised and criticized employment of women and children, though common in the farms and domestic industries of pre-industrial revolution England, was certainly more productive and generally more humane during the industrial revolution.

The workers' standard of living is affected by the redistribution of income by government, especially through taxation and expenditure on social welfare. The tax structure between i8oo and i850 was certainly regressive, although there was income tax during the war (the heaviest of the century) and again after i842 when it yielded C5 millions annually. Government revenue came mainly from indirect taxation, of which customs revenue provided an increasing proportion until i840, and thereafter a stable one. The reduction of tariffs after i824, and especially after i840, gave general benefit by lowering the price of many goods of common consumption and by encouraging the demand for goods which hitherto had been considered luxuries. Other taxation, also mainly indirect, was reduced after the war, and remained relatively stable at C3-4 millions between i825 and i856. Total government revenue also declined after i8I5 both absolutely (until i843) and as a proportion of national income, and in terms of average per capita contributions. On the expenditure side, the national debt service was the largest and most regressive item, but its incidence remained stable in money terms, varying from C33f9 to C28. millions between i8I5 and i845, s0 that it was a decreasing proportion of national income even though in real terms its incidence increased in the period of falling prices. The civil and pensions list, to which The Black Book gave so much publicity, was a small item and it decreased absolutely. 'Social services' cost from ?2 to C5 millions, increasing after I 830, but the benefit to the wor must have been very small. Much more important was the expenditure for the relief and maintenance of the poor through the poor and county rates, which increased to ?7.9 millions in I8I8, varied from ?5.7 to ?7.0 millions from I8I8 to i832, fell to f4-0 millions in i834, and increased to f6'2 millions in I848.4 All that can be said in summary about these collections and disbursements of government is that there was no marked trend, although there was a reduction in the average contributions, and an increase in the average receipts, of the labouring poor. In another way, however, government action was important. Government legislation which involved private expenditure in improving the condition of the working classes was considerable. Such legislation included protective acts like the factory and truck acts, enabling acts

- 1 C. Clark, op. cit. pp. 397, 401.
- 2 See, for example, A. M. Carr-Saunders and P. A. Wilson, The Professions (Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1933), pp. 294-7.
- 3 C. Clark, op. cit. p. 408; E. A. G. Robinson, op. cit. p. 459. The Booth estimates also come from Clark quoting Booth's estimates in The Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, I 886.
- 4 G. R. Porter, op. cit. section IV.

such as the legislation for savings banks and friendly societies, and acts of general benefit such as those improving municipal government. Under such legislation, for example, hours of work were reduced in factories and limits were set to the age at which children were allowed to work, women and children were excluded from mines, some educational facilities were enforced for factory children, and the provision of water and the disposal of sewage by municipal authorities were facilitated. Such legislation, J. M. Ludlow and L: Jones declared, secured 'the primary elements of health, safety and wellbeing' for the people at large, and enabled them 'to become a better fed, better clothed, better housed, more healthy, more orderly, more saving, more industrious, more self-reliant, better educated population'.l There is no doubt that humanitarian and legislative pressure increased the social-overhead cost of industry, directly benefiting the workers, and driving out of business those employers at the margin whose inefficiency had previously been protected by the exploitation of labour.

III

Evidence of the condition of the working class during the industrial revolution can be found also in the statistics of savings, wages and consumption. After the establishment of savings banks in I 8 I 7 deposits increased to I 4-3 millions by i829, and to almost C30 millions by i850, when the number of depositors totalled i,I I2,999. 'The C30 millions of deposits in I847 were predominantly the savings of wage-earners, among whom domestic servants and artisans occupied the most prominent places'.2 Friendly and Benefit Societies, of which there were 20,000 in i858 with a membership of about two millions, had -also accumulated ?9 millions.3 Other societies catering for working-clas savings, such as Building and Land Societies (after i8i6) and Co-operative Societies (after I 844), did not advance with such rapidity, although their foundation in this period is evidence of the increasing ability of the working class to save.4

A large and long economic expansion like the industrial revolution was possible only with a large extension of the market, with the creation or discovery of increasing and accessible markets with consumers willing and able to buy the expanding output of goods and services. For a shorter period, however, it is relevant, in an inquiry into living standards, to know how much of the increased production went into savings and investment rather than into consumption, and how much went abroad without immediate repayment in other goods. But, whatever the amount of savings and exports in the short run, in the long run capital accumulation would have increased productivity, and

- 1 J. M. Ludlow and L. Jones, Progress of the Working Class i832-1867 (London, i867), pp. 69, 82.
- 2 H. 0. Horne, A History of Savings Banks (Oxford University Press, I947), p. i i 6. The trend of savings was upwards except for the years i828-9, i830-2, and x847-8. The range of depositors is best seen in examples: of the I4,937 depositors of the Manchester and Salford Savings Bank in I 842, 3,o63 were domestic servants, 3,033 were children whose parents saved for them, 2,372 were tradesmen, clerks, warehousemen, porters, artists, and teachers, and the remainder were labourers and industrial workers. (W. R. Greg, op. cit. p. 3x8.)
- 3 C. Hardwick, The History, Present Position, and Social Importance of Friendly Societies. (Manchester: Ki ywood, 2nd edition, i869), p. 22.
- 4 J. M. Ludlow and L. Jones, op. cit. p. 125 et seq; G. J. Holyoake, The History of Co-operation (London: Unwin, x 906), Vol. I, 266 et seq. Thus for example, the deeds for houses registered by Building Societies in the West Riding totalled 192 between x843 and i847, x,372 between I 848 and I 852, and 3,044 between I 853 and I 857.

sales abroad would have resulted in increased imports. 1 In any case neither capital accumulation nor exports, nor the two together, could have completely absorbed the increase in production in this period: capital accumulation was not so large as to make exorbitant demands on current output; and exports, as a proportion of national income, increased from I12 per cent in i820 to I5 per cent in i850 (retained imports meantime increasing from i 2 to i8 per cent), while the balance of merchandise trade became increasingly unfavourable (averaging C8-66 m. in i8i6-20, about 3 per cent of national income, and /26.8 m. in i846-50, about 5 per cent of national income).2 There was, however, the period of the war, when much production went either into unproductive war effort at home, or into loans and subsidies for allies abroad. As G. W. Daniels has pointed out, 'the increased power of production, instead of improving the material welfare of the community, had to be devoted to the prosecution of the war'.3 The failure of living standards to rise much before I 8 I 5 was due, therefore, not to industrialization, but to war.

The extension of the market was made possible more by reduced prices than by increased money wages.4 While money wages after the war remained relatively constant, the prices of manufactured and agricultural goods declined. The goods of the industrial and agricultural revolutions tended to be cheap and plentiful, for the new entrepreneurs were fully aware that great expansion of production was possible only by supplying goods suitable for mass markets. Thus, Robert Bakewell's object in breeding new sheep was 'not to produce meat for the tables of the rich, but to supply substantial nourishment for the working classes'. 'I do not breed mutton for gentlemen', he said, 'but for the public'.5 Similarly A. Redgrave of Yorkshire reported that 'the efforts of the majority of West Riding manufacturers have been chiefly directed to the production of cheap cloth; they can unquestionably sell a moderately well got up cloth at a low price;... they can also produce in enormous quantity'.6 If only manufactured goods had fallen in price, however, the gain in real

- 1 Unless, of course, the terms of trade deteriorated so much that the increase in pro was exported. The quantum (at i694 prices) of imports increased from 4 (i8i i-i 8) to I5 (x847-53) and exports from 4 to I 5; the terms of trade (export prices divided by import prices, I913 = ioo) fell from 123 to go. Thus, although some of the increase in productivity went abroad, imports increased at much the same rate as exports. (W. A. Lewis, Economic Survey, I919-1939, London: Allen and Unwin, 1949, pp. I95, 202.)
- 2 Percentages reckoned from the figures of E. A. G. Robinson, op. cit.; P. Deane, op. cit.; and L. Levi, History of British Commerce (London, I 872).
- 3 G. W. Daniels, The Early English Cotton Industry (Manchester University Press, i920), pp. x47-8. The memory of war hardships persisted throughout the nineteenth century resulting, for example, in such statements as that of J. E. Thorold Rogers: 'Thousands of homes were starved in order to find the means for the great war ... the resources on which the struggle was based, and without which it would have speedily collapsed, were the stint and starvation of labour, the overtaxed and underfed toils of childhood, the underpaid and uncertain employment of men' (Six Centuries of Work and Wages, London, x884, p. 505). See also Sir George Nicholls, A History of the English Poor Law (First edition i86o. New edition by H. G. Willink, London, 1904), vol. II, i65-6; and W. Cunningham, The Growth of English Industry and Commerce in Modern Times (First edition 1882. Cambridge University Press, 1925 edition), vol. III, section III.
- 4 For example, G. R. Porter, op. cit. p. 459: 'the diminution in the weekly earnings. . . has been but small in any case, and certainly not commensurate with the diminished cost of most of the necessaries of life, comprehending in this list most articles of food, and every article of clothing?.
- 5 A. Rees, The Cyclopaedia (London, i8i9), vol. 32., article on 'Sheep'; R. Wallace, Farm Live Stock of Great Britain (Edinburgh, 4th ed., I 907), p. 575.
- 6 A. Ure, Philosophy of Manufactures (Revised edition by P. L. Simmonds, London,, i86i), p. 7I0.

wages to a working class that spent a high proportion of its income on food and fuel would not have been large. But food prices also declined after i8I5, along with the prices of most other consumer goods. R. S. Tucker's index of consumer goods prices-for food, fuel and light, and clothing, the most important items in working class budgets-shows a downward trend from i8I3-I5 to i845, as also does Miss E. B. Schumpeter's index for 22 articles of food and drink, and nine articles of fuel, light and clothing.' Money wages, in contrast, rose slightly less than prices during the war, and remained stable, or fell less than prices after the war, as the wages indices that have been compiled for this period show.2 The facts that aggregate money national income increased substantially, money wages remained stable, and prices of key foodstuffs remained stable or fell, suggest clearly that food supplies at least kept pace with population. When other commodities are taken into consideration, the implication is clear: an increase in real wages, at least after i8I5, which it would be irresponsible to deny, and which, indeed, has been confirmed by the industrial histories of the period.3

Although consumption statistics before i85o are inadequate and unreliable, they do indicate modest though fluctuating increases in the consumption of most foodstuffs and other consumption goods.4 M. G. Mulhall, for example, has reckoned that between I81 I and I850 the per capita consumption of sugar, tea, beer and eggs increased, while that of wheat decreased somewhat

- 1 R. S. Tucker, 'Real Wages of Artisans in London, I729-1935', Journal of the A Statistical Society, 1936. E. B. Schumpeter, 'English Prices and Public Finance, i660-1822', Review of Economic Statistics, I 938.
- 2 For example, see the articles of A. L. Bowley in The Journal of the Statistical Society i898, I899, I902) and The Economic Journal (i895, i896) and his book Wages in the United Kingdom in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge University Press, i900); G. H. Wood, 'The Course of Average Wages between I 790 and i 86o', The Economic journal, I 899; N. D. Kondratieff, 'Die Preisdynamic der Industriellen und Landwirtschaftlichen Waren', Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, I930; E. H. Phelps Brown and S. V. Hopkins, 'Seven Centuries of Building Wages', Economica, I 955; R. S. Tucker, op. cit. Moreover, those who have argued for deterioration have too often depended, not on indices, but on individual statements of hardship that were exaggerated; thus W. Felkin (Remarks upon the Importance of an Inquiry into the Amount and Appropriation of Wages by the Working Classes, London, i837, p. 7), comparing workers' statements about wages received with wages actually received as recorded in employers' account books, wrote, 'The results are, No. I says i6s, he received i8s; No. 2 says 15s, he received i8s; No. 3 says i6s, he received 2oS; No. 4 says i8s, he received 26s; No. 5 says I5s, he received 25s'.
- 3 For example, S. J. Chapman, The Lancashire Cotton Industry (Manchester University Press, 1904), p. 75; T. S. Ashton, Iron and Steel in the Industrial Revolution (Manchester University Pr 1924), p. 75; T. S. Ashton and J. Sykes, The Coal Industry of the Eighteenth Century (Manchester University Press, 1929), p. I4I ; F. A. Wells, The British Hosiery Trade (London, 1935), pp. 128See also A. D. Gayer, W. W. Rostow, and A. J. Schwartz, The Growth and Fluctuation of the British Economy I790-I850 (Oxford: at the Clarendon Press, 1953), vol. II, ch. XI, 'Cyclical Patterns Relating to the Condition of Labour'. See also the contemporary general books: for example, G. R. Porter, op.cit. p. 459; P. Gaskell, The Manufacturing Population of England (London, 1833); J. Ward, Workmen and Wages at Home and Abroad, (London, i868); S. Smiles, 1WVorkmen's Earnings, Strikes and Savings (London, I86i); J. R. McCulloch, The Principles of Political Economy (London, 4th edition, I 849) .
- 4 E. J. Hobsbawm argues that the case for deterioration, if it can be established, 'will be done on the basis of consumption data' and declares that 'there is no evidence of any major rise in the per capita consumption of several foodstuffs, and in some instances evidence of a temporary fall' (op. cit. p. 57). The use of 'major' makes this statement difficult to refute, but Dr bawm's evidence about the consumption of meat, wheat, milk, cheese, butter, eggs, tea, sugar and tobacco (the commodities he considers) is ambiguous: he admits increases in the last three items; bases his figures of meat and wheat consumption on very dubious statistics (see below); argues that consumption of dairy produce must have declined because 'cow-keeping must have declined with urbanisation' (no statistics provided), and that they were, in any case, inferior substitutes for meat; states that consumption of eggs 'can hardly have risen' (no evidence).

between i830 and i850, increasing thereafter.1 Import statistics are the most accurate of the measures of consumption in this period, and these show important long-term gains in a wide range of commodities; for example, in tea, 'from about i8i5 there is a secular rise, notably accelerated in the last decade of the period'; in tobacco, also a 'persistent upward trend'; and in sugar, 'the trend movement is upward'.2 By i840, to take one source of imports, steamships were pouring into England an almost daily stream of Irish livestock, poultry, meat and eggs. During 'the hungry forties' there were increases in the average per capita consumption of a number of imported foodstuffs: butter, cocoa, cheese, coffee, rice, sugar, tea, tobacco, currants.3 For this reason Peel, in his election letter to the electors of Tamworth in july i847, noting the large increase in the import of non-essential foodstuffs between I841 and i846, declared: 'Can there be a doubt that if the consumption of articles of a second necessity has been thus advancing, the consumption of articles of first necessity, of meat and of bread for instance, has been making at least an equally rapid progress?' 4 Certainly, when -P. L. Simmonds considered national eating habits in the i850's he concluded 'how much better an En man is fed than anyone else in the world'.5

There are, unfortunately, no adequate statistics for bread and meat consumption. The main statistical uncertainties in the case of bread are the acreage and the yield of cereal crops, especially wheat. There is no convincing evidence for Dr Hobsbawm's statement that, 'The fundamental fact is that, as contemporaries already knew, wheat production and imports did not keep pace with the growth of population so that the amount of wheat available per capita fell steadily from the late eighteenth century until the I 85os, the amou of potatoes available rising at about the same rate'.6 On the contrary, as T. Tooke, G. R. Porter, J. R. McCulloch and even J. S. Mill pointed out, agricultural output increased faster than population.7 When F. M. Eden wrote in I797, barley, oat and rye breads were common, especially in the north; when McCulloch discussed bread in his commercial dictionary in i859 he commented on the disappearance of barley and oat breads, the incon-

- 1 M. G. Mulhall, The Dictionary of Statistics (London, I 892), pp. 286, 542, 354, 28 I, I 58, I 20. Mulhall also gives statistics for increasing per capita consumption of soap, leather, linen, cotton and coal.
- 2 Gayer, Rostow and Schwartz, op. cit. vol. II, 957-65.
- 3 L. Levi, op. cit. p. 497. It could be argued that food imports increased to compensate for inadequate home supplies, without any per capita increase in total food supply. More plausibly, however, it can be argued that Britain increasingly specialized to benefit from her comparative advantages in industrial production. That such specialization increased living standards, even in this period, is indicated by the 'luxury' character of many of the food imports' An absolute increase in demand occurred both when tariffs, and hence prices, were reduced (for example, tea prices were reduced from 2S. 9d. per lb. in i83I to is. in 1853), and also when prices remained relatively stable (for example, with sugar and coffee).
- 4 Memoirs by the Right Honourable Sir Robert Peel (London, i857), vol. II, I04.
- 5 P. L. Simmonds, The Curiosities ofFood (London, i859), p. 2.
- 6 E. J. Hobsbawm, op. cit. p. 59. Dr Hobsbawm's wheat statistics come from R. N. Salaman (The History and Social Influence of the Potato, Cambridge University Press, 1949, Appendix IV) who took them from Lord Ernle (English Farming Past and Present, London: Longmans, Green, listed. I912).
- 7 Thus, for example, J. S. Mill, who probably believed that living standards had been lowered by industrialization, argued that, 'In England and Scotland agricultural skill has of late increased considerably faster than population, insomuch that food and other agricultural produce, notwithstanding the increase of people, can be grown at less cost than they were thirty years ago.' (Written in i848.) (Principles of Political Economy, edited by W. J. Ashley, London: Longman's Green, I 9 I 5, p. 704.)

siderable use of rye bread, and the universal consumption in towns and villages, and almost everywhere in the country, of wheat bread.' Such a substitution in a rapidly growing population-and one usually associated with increasing living standards-would not have been possible without a large increase in the home production of wheat, for it cannot be accounted for by the increase in imports. In the century of the agricultural revolution, however, this is not surprising: between I760 and i864 the common fields and wastes of England were enclosed, increasing both the area of, and yield from, arable. Even without other improvements, enclosure generally increased yields substantially. The largest increase in cultivation was during the war, and exactly how much increase there was after i8I5 is not known.2 Drescher estimated, however, that wheat cultivation in England and Wales increased from 3 to 3 8 million acres between I798 and i846, and that yields increased from 20-24 bushels per acre to 32-34 bushels. In a study of wheat yields over seven centuries, M. K. Bennett showed that 'the most rapid rate of increase in British wheat yield was probably in the century between I 750 and i850', that whereas I5 bushels was 'broadly representative of British wheat yield per acre in the middle of the eighteenth century', the representative yield in i850 was 26-28 bushels.3 On Drescher's estimates, wheat productionjust failed to keep pace with population. On other and reasonably plausible assumptions-for example, that yields were under 20 bushels per acre in i8oo, and nearly 30 bushels in i850domestic wheat production (without wheat imports) was keeping pace with population.4 Wheat and bread prices certainly support the view that there was no long-term shortage of wheat and flour. Wheat prices fell sharply after i8I5 and were relatively stable, though with a discernible downward trend, after i822, the yearly average reaching 70s. only on one occasion, i839, before i850, and the price in i835, 39s.4d., being the lowest for half a century.5 The price of bread was also relatively stable in these years; for example, the London four lb. loaf fluctuated from 6-8d to II5d between i820 and i850, but with a range of 6 8d to I odd in all but seven years, and with decade averages of 9?7d, 9 Id and 9-3d.6

- 1 F. M. Eden, The State of the Poor (Edited by A. G. L. Rogers, London: Routledge, 1928), pp. 103-4; J. R. McCulloch, A Dictionary, Practical, Theoretical and Historical of Commerce and Commercial Navigation (Edited by H. G. Reid, London, i869), p. 197. Even as early as 1795 Count Rumford (An Essay on Food and particularly on Feeding the Poor, new edition, Dublin, i847, p. 48) commented on the 'strange dislike' of rye bread in England.
- 2 Agricultural historians of this period do agree, however, that the area of cultivation expanded after I 815; for example, W. H. R. Curtler, The Enclosure and Redistribution of our Land (Oxford: at the Clarendon Press, 1920), pp. 231-2; A. H. Johnson, The Disappearance of the Small Landowner (Oxford: at the Clarendon Press, i909), p. 99; J. A. Venn, Foundations of Agricultural Economics (Cambridge University Press, 1923), p. 314; G. E. Fussell and M. Compton, 'Agricultural Adjustments after the Napoleonic Wars', Economic History, February 1939, p. 202; L. Drescher, 'The Development of Agricultural Production in Great Britain and Ireland from the early nineteenth Century', The Manchester School, May 1955, p. i67.
- 3 M. K. Bennett, 'British Wheat Yield per acre for Seven Centuries', Economic History, February 1935, p. 28.
- 4 T. Tooke and W. Newmarch (op. cit. vol. V, 132) wrote in 1857 that 'during the last thirty years, the increase in England' on the Average Acreable Produce of Wheat is very much greater than it is the habit to suppose', with supporting evidence. Compare J. R. McCulloch's statement (i869) that 'the produce of the wheat crops has been, at the very least quadrupled since 1760'. (Op. cit. p. 197.)
- *5 W. Page (Ed.), Commerce and Industry (London: Constable, I9I9), vol. II, 2i6; T. H. Baker, Records of the Seasons, Prices of Agricultural Produce, and Phenomena observed in the British (London, i 883), p. 249 et seq.
- 6 Wheat, Return to House of Commons, 7th August 19 1 2.

Far less is known about potato consumption than wheat consumption, although R. N. Salaman reckoned that per capita daily consumption in England and Wales increased from o4 to o6 lbs. between I795 and i838.1 The theory that this increase was not a net addition to total diet, associated after I815 with the increasing use of allotments by the working class, but a necessary substitution of an inferior vegetable for wheat bread, is based on the doubtful assumptions that bread consumption was declining, and that the potato was an inferior food. Prejudice against the potato stemmed partly from dislike of the Irish, and certainly the half million Irish in England in i85o h to explain the increasing popularity of the root. But increasing consumption was due also to the simple facts that people liked potatoes and that they were good food, as Adam Smith demonstrated.2 Moreover the potato was but one of many vegetables and fruits whose consumption was increasing.3 Vegetables, that in i8oo had only been grown casually, like water-cress, were by i850 commercialized; fruits that were not imported at all, or in very small quantities in i8oo, were regularly imported by the i830's-for example, cherries and apples-and in large quantities by i850.4 In London, Covent Garden was rebuilt in i827, and by i850 there were in addition five other important markets supplying the metropolis with fruit and vegetables. By I 85o every large town had its market gardens and orchards, and for London, the largest and richest market, the movement was well under way which by i870 had almost filled the Thames Valley with fruit trees and vegetable crops.5

'Next to the Habeas Corpus and the Freedom of the Press,' Charles Dickens wrote, 'there are few things that the English people have a greater respect for and livelier faith in than beef'. In the first fifty years of the nineteenth century, the English working class came to expect meat as a part of the normal diet.6 Above all other foods, wheat bread and meat were to them the criteria of increasing living standards and superiority over foreigners. 'Until the "Roast beef of old England" shall cease to be one of the institutions of the country-one of the characteristics whereby foreigners believe, at any rate, that they may judge us as a nation-butchers' meat will continue to be (with the exception of bread) the chief article in our commissariat', G. Dodd declared in i856.7 The

- 1 R. N. Salaman, op. cit. p. 6 I 3. It is interesting that consumption of potatoes today is almost exactly the same as in i 838, between 3 and 4 lbs. per person per week. (Economic Trends, No. 59, September I958, p. xvii; and The Times, 2i April I959.)

2 Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations (Cannan edition, New York: The Modern Library, I937, p. i6i): 'The Chairmen, porters, and coal-heavers in London, and those unfortunate women who live by prostitution, the strongest men and the most beautiful women perhaps in the British dominions, are said to be, the greater part of them, from the lowest rank of people in Ireland, who are generally fed with this root. No food can afford a more decisive proof of its nourishing quality, or of its being peculiarly suitable to, the health of the human constitution.'

- 3 See G. Dodd (The Food of London, London, i856), H. Mayhew (London Labour and the London Poor, London, i851), B. Poole (Statistics of British Commerce, London, i 852), and The Commissariat of London (The Quarterly Review, September i854), for the fruit and vegetable markets of London.
- 4 Dodd, op. cit. pp. 377-8.
- 5 See, for example, J. Cuthill, Market Gardening round London (London i851) and C. W. Shaw, The London Market Gardens (London, i879), for a description of the Thames Valley gardens and orchards. Shaw commented that 'the price paid now for fruits deviates but slightly from that paid half a century ago; although the quantity which we receive is fifty times greater, yet the demand has increased accordingly, and thus the price has been kept up.' (Pp. 82-83.)
- 6 Reports from Commissioners (I3), Poor Laws, (Ireland), Parliamentary Papers, 1836 (XXXIV) p. xii, comments that the English working class have meat most days, in contrast to the Irish. See also C. S. Peel, 'Homes and Habits' (Early Victorian England i830-i865, Oxford, I 934, vol. I, pp. i26-143) showing working class budgets i824-59, all with meat. 7 Dodd, op. cit. p. 2 I I .

fifty years before had been a period of widespread livestock improvement. For example, the story of the English sheep in this period was one of substituting mutton for wool as the main criterion of breeding, a substitution firmly based on economic incentives; the flock owners were turning away from the ancient breeds to larger, stronger and quickly-maturing breeds like the New Leicester and the Southdown.1 As with sheep, so with cattle and pigs.

The only detailed statistics of meat consumption, however, are for London, based on killings at Smithfield, where, between I 8oo and i850, the slaughter of cattle increased 9i per cent and sheep 92 per cent while London population meantime increased I73 per cent.2 But these figures ignore any increase in carcass weight, and, also, the supply from other markets. Smithfield killings cannot be accepted as a reliable index for London meat consumption-as E. J. Hobsbawm does 3-for there were other fast growVing markets-Newgate, Leadenhall, Farringdon and Whitechapel-in addition to a number of smaller markets, all of which were largely dependent on country-killed meat and on imported 'preserved' meats, like bacon and salt pork.4 Even in the mideighteenth century, when London was smaller and Smithfield relatively more important, perhaps only two-thirds of the fresh meat for London went through Smithfield, 'because the London butchers bought at the country markets and at fairs in Cambridge, Northampton and Norfolk as well as bringing carcases in'.5 In the nineteenth century the limitations of Smithfield 6 and the growth of London led inevitably to the development of other sources of supply, other markets that increased in size more rapidly than Smithfield. Newgate had 13 principal salesmen in I 81 0, and by i 850, 200, who were handling half as man sheep, three-quarters as many cattle, and more calves and pigs than Smithfield; in i850, 8oo tons of country-killed meat arrived there weekly, mainly by railway. In the same year Poole estimated that the yearly sales at Newgate and Leadenhall amounted to 76,500 tons.7 Certainly the railways much increased the supply of country-killed meat to London, but well before their time increasing quantities had been transported in waggons and carts. At the same time the import of bacon, ham and salt pork increased. Little wonder, therefore, that McCulloch concluded that 'the... extraordinary increase in the supply of butchers' meat' wvas evidence of 'a very signal improvement. . . in the condit of the population, in respect of food'.8 Nor, of course, was the increased supply confined to London. As a farmer noted significantly in i836, the fat stock of Gloucestershire and Cumberland were then going, not to London as before,

- 1 Lord Ernle, op. cit. p. 37I; R. Trow-Smith, A History of British Livestock Husbandry I700-1900 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, I959), pp. 156-8; J. Bischoff, A Comprehensive History of the Woollen and Worsted Manufactures (London, i842), vol. II, 255. Bischoff reckoned that by I850 eight million sheep were slaughtered annually to give the Englishman his mutton.
- 2 Averaging 1 798- i 802 and I 848- i 852.
- '3 Hobsbawm, op. cit. p. 65.
- 4 Dodd, op. cit. p. 267 et seq., p. 276 et seq.; Report of the Commissioners Appointed to make Inquiries relating to Smithfield Market and the Markets in the City of London for the sale of Meat (Reports of Commissioners (i2), Parliamentary Papers, 1850, XXXI), pp. i6-i8; The Commissariat of London, op. cit. pp. 280-7.
- 5 G. E. Fussell and C. Goodman, 'Eighteenth-Century Traffic in Live-Stock', Economic History, February 1936, p. 231.
- 6 In i854 Smithfield market occupied under seven acres. The Commissariat of London, op. cit. p. 280.
- 7 Dodd, op. cit. p. 273; B. Poole, op. cit. p. 225; McCulloch, Dictionary, op. cit. pp. 281-3; Levi, of). cit. p. 497; Report of Commissioners ... .for the sale of meat, op. cit. p. i 6; The Com London, op. cit. p. 287. See also, A. B. Robertson, 'The Suburban Food Markets of EighteenthCentury London' (East London Papers, II, I, p. 21 et seq.), for an account of the expansion of market facilities in London up to i8oi.
- 8 McCulloch, Dictionary, op. cit. p. 197.

but increasingly to Birmingham, Liverpool and the other industrial towns.1 Increased supply was reflected in prices, with steady prices generally from I 8 I 9 to I 841, and fluctuating prices in the forties.2

Another important food whose consumption was increasing at this time was fish.3 Before I815, except during gluts, fish was expensive, and appeared regularly only on the tables of the well-to-do. Early in the nineteenth century, consumption was small, partly because of religious prejudice, partly because of the difficulty of transporting such a perishable commodity, partly because of a preference for meat. After i815 increasing supply and decreasing prices (the average price for all fish at Billingsgate in i833 was 21d. per lb.) 5 led to a large increase in consumption; but even in i833 the clerk of Billingsgate declared that 'the lower class of people entertain the notion that fish is not substantial food enough for them, and they prefer meat'.6 Nevertheless the poor by this time were becoming large purchasers of fish, taking particular advantage of price fluctuations (which were much greater than for meat) to increase consumption. When, for example, mackerel and herring were cheap, the poor ate 'a great deal of them' and at any time the news of cheap fish spread throughout London 'with wonderful celerity'.7 Official statistics, unfortunately, are confined mainly to the Scottish herring export industry. We know, however, that 'a large proportion of the Fish caught upon the English coast [was] supplied by hand carriage to the London and Inland Markets', and, also, that the supply of fish increased after the abolition of the salt tax in i825, and, after i830, with technical innovations in fishing that increased yields, particularly the development of deep-sea trawling and of drift fishing; with improvements in the handling of fish, for example, the use of fast cutters, walled steamers and the railways, and the increasing use of ice; and with the discovery of new fishing waters, for example, the Great Silver Pitt, south of the Dogger, in i837.8 By i840 ice and fast transport were enabling trawlers to fish farther north, and were opening up new markets in the inland towns.9 The kipper was invented in i843.10 By i850 steamship and railway combined to transport catches quickly to the centres of consumption all over England: steamships linked the Channel, North and German Seas to the English ports; railways linked the ports to the internal towns and London. In season, herrings alone were arriving in London from Yarmouth at the rate of i6o tons an

- 1 Parliamentary Papers i836 (465) VIII, part 2, pp. i8i, 2io; also, i833 (6i2) V, p. 59, saying that meat 'sells well in the large towns', 'the mechanics having more money to lay out'.
- 2 Tooke and Newmarch, op. cit. vol. II, 85, I35, 257; vol. VI, 454-60.
- 3 Commissariat of London, op. cit. pp. 273-280; C. L. Cutting, Fish Saving (London, I955), PP. 207-30.
- 4 'The Reformation seems almost to have abolished the use of fish among this class of the community; they have contracted, I know not how, some obstinate prejudice against a kind of food at once wholesome and delicate, and everywhere to be obtained cheaply and in abundance, were the demand for it as general as it ought to be.' R. Southey, Sir Thomas More, or Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects of Society (London, I 829), vol. I, 1 75.
- 5 Parliamentary Papers i833 (676), XIV, 95.
- 6 Ibid. p. 94.
- 7 Ibid. pp. 94, 100.
- 8 Parliamentary Papers I 833 (676), XIV, p. i 2; J. T. Jenkins, The Sea Fisheries (London, 1920), p. 145, and chapters II and V; The Commissariat of London, op. cit. pp. 278-9.
- 9 Cutting, op. cit. p. 220.
- 10 Ibid. p. 277.

evening, and even the humble periwinkle, Simmonds estimated, was consumed at the rate of 76,ooo baskets (or I,900 tons) annually.'

The conclusion from consumption figures is unquestionably that the amount and variety of food consumed increased between i8oo and i850. Even an uncritical reading of those entertaining and informative volumes of G. R. Dodd (The Food of London) and H. Mayhew (London Labour and the London Poor), and of the article 'The Commissariat of London' in The Quarterly Review (i854), will reveal the size, range and quality of London's food supplies. By I 850, using admittedly rough calculations of Dodd, McCulloch, Mayhew, Poole, Mulhall and Levi, the Londoner was consuming each week 5 Oz. of butter, 30 oz. of meat, 56 oz. of potatoes, .and i6 OZ. of fruit, compared with an English consumption today of 5 oz. of butter, 35 oz. of meat, 5 I oz. of potatoes, and 32 OZ. of fruit. Even allowing for contemporary exaggeration and enthusiasm, the consumption of basic foods in i85o London was not wildly inferior to modern England.3

IV

What conclusion follows from the evidence so far presented? Surely, since the indices point in the same direction, even though the change cannot be measured with accuracy, that the standard of living of the mass of the people of England was improving in the first half of the nineteenth century, slowly during the war, more quickly after i8I5, and rapidly after i840. And, if expectation of life depends partly on living standards, the increase in average life over these years is further proof of increasing well-being. As Macaulay argued, 'that the lives of men should become longer while their bodily condition during life is becoming worse, is utterly incredible'. The expectation of life at birth in I 840-50 was higher than in I 770-80; by the I 840's infantile mortality rates had been reduced from 'the terrifying levels of the eighteenth century', and 'the death rate for ages 0-4 ... was very low, at least for a highly urbanised country at that time'.4 McKeown and Brown have shown that medical improvements could have had little effect on life expectation before i

- 1 Simmonds, op. cit. p. 345; Dodd, op. cit. p. 34i et seq. London streets in the forties were crowded with barrows. When Jorrocks and the Yorkshireman went from Covent Garden to Surrey they met, among others, 'an early breakfast and periwinkle stall', 'three water-cress women', 'one pies-all-ot! -all-ot man', 'a whole covey of Welsh milk-maids'. (Jorrocks's Ta and jollities, i843.) By i854 there were probably 30,000 costermongers, hawkers and stallkeepers in London. (The Commissariat of London, op. cit. p. 307.)
- 2 The i 850 calculations are made by simple division of yearly totals, when given, by London population; the modern figures come from The Times, 2 I April I959.
- 3 Of other foodstuffs mentioned by Dr Hobsbawm, milk and eggs deserve some attention. Of milk, he wrote, 'it is difficult to see anything but a decline ... because cow-keeping must have declined with urbanisation' (p. 59). But this was a period of 'a new race of enlightened cowkeepers' when the railway enabled 'the evening's milk from the country to be on the London doorstep the next morning'. As Trow Smith points out: by I 853 on some farms in Surrey ' I00 to I50 cows are kept and the milk sent to the Waterloo terminus of the South Western Railway' (op. cit. pp. 305, 309). There were, in any case, about 20,000 cows in metropolitan and suburban dairies in i854. (The Commissariat of London, op. cit. p. 287.) Of eggs, Simmonds wrote of 'the sixty wholesale egg merchants and salesmen in the metropolis, whose itinerant carts are kept constantly occupied in distributing their brittle ware' and the 'railways and steamers bring up large crates, and carefully packed boxes of eggs, for the ravenous maws of young and old'. (Op. cit. p. 138.) Mayhew also refers to the change in the egg trade due to the 'immense quantities from France and Belgium'. (Op. cit. Vol. i, p. I 29.)
- 4 H. J. Habakkuk, 'The Economic History of Modern Britain', Journal of Economic History, December 1958, p. 496; J. T. Krause, 'Changes in English Fertility and Mortality', Economic History Review, August 1958, pp. 66-7.

suggest that it was an improvement in the economic and social environment that lengthened life.' People lived longer because they were better nourished and sheltered, and cleaner, and thus were less vulnerable to infectious and other diseases (like consumption) that were peculiarly susceptible to improved living standards.2 Factory conditions also improved. R. Baker, one of the early factory inspectors, in a paper to the Social Science Association at Bradford in i859, declared of the years i822 to i856 that 'all the diseases which were specific to factory labour in i822 have as nearly as possible disappeared', and, quoting a Dr Smith of Leeds, referred particularly to 'the wonderful change in the condition of the female part of the population ... So striking a difference in twenty-five years I could not have believed, had I not marked and seen it with my own eyes'.

But increasing life expectation and increasing consumption are no measures of ultimate well-being, and to say that the standard of living for most workers was rising, is not to say that it was high, nor is it to affirm that it was rising fast, nor that there was no dire poverty, and cyclical fluctuations and technological unemployment of a most distressing character. It is as foolish to ignore the sufferings of this period as to deny the wealth and opportunities created by the new industry. Moreover little understanding comes from trying to attribute blame for the suffering that did exist. The discomfort of the period was due in large part to an inability to handle new problems or old problems enormously magnified; problems of increasing population, of urbanization, of factory conditions, of fluctuating trade and employment. And the tensions of the period arose naturally from the rapidly changing social and economic relationships. As the Hammonds point out: 'When ... society is passing through changes that destroy the life of custom, the statesman who seeks ... to command man's will and not merely his deeds and services has a specially difficult task, for these changes bring into men's minds the dreaded questions that have been sleeping beneath the surface of habit'.3 On the easier practical problems, to take an example, municipal authorities did not have the knowledge, and usually not the adequate authority, to deal with the various problems of sanitation in rapidly growing cities. Such problems required study, experiment and experience, as well as a change of attitudes, before they could be solved, so that it was ignorance rather than avarice that was often the cause of misery. In any case, much of the ill that has been attributed solely to the industrial

- 1 T. McKeown and R. G. Brown, 'Medical Evidence Related to English Population Changes in the Eighteenth Century', Population Studies, November I955. In so far as the population increase was due to an increased birth rate, whether from a lower marriage age, or from increasing fertility without a change in the age of marriage, economic factors again were probably important. Improved conditions, also, would help to explain 'the failure of births to fall as soon as one would have expected under the pressure of population' (Habakkuk, opt cit. p. 495), a phenomenon puzzling to those who take for granted a Malthusian situation in England at this period.
- 2 Dr Hobsbawm argues that a greater regularity of supply in per capita consumption does not imply a rise in living standards, even though it causes a reduction in mortality. 'It is quite possible for the industrial citizen to be worse fed in a normal year than his predecessor, so long as he is more regularly fed' (p. 46). This is double talk; the final criterion is surely death? Some people may prefer a combination of feasts and famine, with an uncertain expectation of life, but surely most people would prefer regular consumption, the certainty of longer life, and the hope of improved conditions. And, in any case, there were no feasts in pre-industrial, or modern non-industrial societies: the alternatives were (and are) subsistence, and, when crops fail, less than subsistence. In the classic definition of welfare, a person is better off if his income is larger, or more evenly distributed over time.
- 3 J. L. and B. Hammond, The Bleak Age (Pelican edition, 1947), p. 30.

revolution existed also in the pre-industrial age. 'Appalling as was the state of things revealed by the nineteenth-century reports (i840-45) on the sanitary state of towns it can hardly be doubted that the state of London was far worse in the eighteenth century'.1 And by i854 London was 'the healthiest metropolis in Europe'.2

Thus much misunderstanding has arisen because of assumptions-mainly misconceptions-about England before the Industrial Revolution; assumptions, for example, that rural life was naturally better than town life, that working for oneself was better and more secure than working for an employer, that child and female labour was something new, that the domestic system (even though it often involved a house crammed with industrial equipment) was preferable to the factory system, that slums and food adulteration were peculiar products of industrialization, and so on; in other words, the perennial myth of the golden age, the belief that since conditions were bad, and since one did not approve of them, they could not have been worse, and, indeed, must once have been better! But, as Alfred Marshall pointed out: 'Popular history underrates the hardships of the people before the age of factories'.3

Rural life was just as appalling as urban life: on the estates of the Marquis of Ailesbury much later cottage conditions exhibited 'a violation of all decency', 'altogether filthy and disgusting', with, in extreme cases, I2 persons in one room and 'depravity which the towns could scarcely have rivalled'.4 Insecurity, as T. S. Ashton has demonstrated, was as much a characteristic of the eighteenth as of the nineteenth century, with regular cycles of trade complicated by harvest failures for which there was no adequate redress.5 In any case, already before the industrial revolution, large numbers of employees worked as wage-labourers for clothiers, ironmongers, hosiers, and the government. 'In the textile trades, in particular, there must have been thousands of workers who never set eyes on their employer. The notion that the coming of factories meant a depersonalizationn" of relations to industry is the reverse of the truth.'6 Again, in the eighteenth century the domestic system and agriculture (the largest employer before the coming of the factories) depended heavily on the labour of women and children.

Similarly, food adulteration, which Dr Hobsbawm seems to think was suddenly discovered in the I 85o's, was well known to Smollett in I 77 complained that: 'The bread I eat in London, is a deleterious paste, mixed up with chalk, alum, and bone-ashes; insipid to the taste and destructive to the constitution'. 'I need not dwell upon the pallid contaminated mash, which they call strawberries; soiled and tossed by greasy paws through twenty baskets crusted with dirt; and then presented with the worst milk, thickened with the worst flour, into a bad likeness of cream.' 'The milk . . . the produce of faded cabbage-leaves and sour draff, lowered with hot water, frothed with

- I M. D. George, London Life in the Eighteenth Century (London, 1925), p. 103. See also, T. S. Ashton, 'Changes in the Standard of Comfort in Eighteenth-Century England' (Proceedings of the British Academy, 1955).
- 2 D. Roberts, Victorian Origins of the British Welfare State (Yale University Press, i960), p. 325.
- 3 A. Marshall, Industry and Trade (London, 1920, 3rd edition), p. 73 n.
- 4 F. M. L. Thompson, 'English Landownership: The Ailesbury Trust, I 832-56', Economic History Review, August 1958, p. I 28.
- 5 T. S. Ashton, Economic Fluctuations in England 1700-i800 (Oxford: at The Clarendon Press, 1959)a
- 6 T..S. Ashton, An Economic History of England: The i8th Century (London: Methuen, 1955) pp. 102-3.

bruised snails, carried through the streets in open pails'.1 Likewise with morals. It cannot be assumed that the moral standards of the working class had deteriorated, or, indeed, that they were worse than those of their betters. The Webbs were certainly shocked by the morals of the eighteenth century where they discovered 'a horrifying mass of sensual and sordid delinquency' and 'private licentiousness'.2 Moreover, the evidence about morals is, to say the least, ambiguous; and, in any case, immorality in the slums was no worse, in quantity or kind, than immorality in high society.

But if misery was not a new phenomenon, the range and possibility of opportunities for workmen were new. As A. Toynbee admitted: 'The artisan's horizon became indistinct; there was no visible limit to subsistence'.3 Economy and society were in process of rapid change, and the opportunities for wealth and social advancement were greater than they had ever been before. The result was the increasing self-respect of the poor that so pleased Francis Place and the young Edwin Chadwick.4 One might well ask, however, as did the Hammonds: 'Why did this age with all its improvements create such violent discontent?' 5 But discontent is not merely a simple product of living standards. The vision of an age of plenty, stimulated by the obvious productivity of new machines that seemed to compete with labour, roused both anger and ambition. The breaking-up of the old social relationships was a liberating and stimulating experience that made possible, for the first time, an effective working class movement. And although the standard of living was rising, it was not rising quickly, and the individual was aware only that his wages were meagre and not sufficient to satisfy his wants and needs. As A. L. Bowley has pointed out: 'The idea of progress is largely psychological and certainly relative; people are apt to measure their progress not from a forgotten position in the past, but towards an ideal, which, like an horizon, continually recedes. The present generation is not interested in the earlier needs and successes of its progenitors, but in its own distresses and frustration considered in the light of the presumed possibility of universal comfort or riches'.6 Discontent, even disorder, were indeed understandable, and both, like suffering, it must be

- 1 T. Smollett, The Expedition of Humphry Clinker (I 771: World Classics Edition, Oxford, pp. 144, 146.
- 2 Webb Local Government Collection, London School of Economics and Political Science, report (unpublished) by Ruth Atkins.
- 3 A. Toynbee, Lectures on the Industrial Revolution of the Eighteenth Century in England (London, 1913 edition), 'Malthus and the Law of Population', p. 9i.
- 4 See M. D. George, London Life in the Eighteenth Century, op. cit. pp. 103, 105; quoting Chadwick commenting in i828 of 'considerable improvements . .. in the domestic habits of artisans; they are more cleanly and regular, their houses are better constructed, they have acquired some notions that fresh air is conducive to health, and the streets where they reside are less filthy and pestilential than formerly'. Professor Schultes of Baden, visiting London in i 824, also noted a habit that showed the increasing refinement of the poor: 'the poor Londoner who cannot afford to buy what is beautiful, will still obtain ... something green to decorate the window of his dark little attic, and give his last farthing for a bit of verdure . .. the poor artisan of the French capital, he only thinks of vegetable productions as they are fit for culinary uses.' (Si W.J. Hooker, Botannical Miscellany, London, I 831-3, Vol. I, 72-3.)
- 5 J. L. Hammond, 'The Industrial Revolution and Discontent', Economic History Review, January 1930, p. 215. A. V. Dicey, (Law and Public Opinion in England during the Nineteenth Century, London, 2nd edition, 1914, pp. lxviii-lxix) argued that discontent 'is often due far less to the absolute amount of the suffering endured among men . . . than to the increased vividness of the contrast between given institutions and the desires of persons who suffer, or think they suffer, from the existing state of things.'
- 6 A. L. Bowley, Wages and Income in the United Kingdom since i86o (Cambridge University Press, 1937), p. x.

## 406 THE STANDARD OF LIVING

remembered, were also characteristic of the previous age. But the disorder of the forties was far less violent and destructive than the Gordon Riots, and this restraint was due, not only to better police, but 'to the fact that the English industrial working class was on the whole better housed, better fed, better educated, and far less degraded than in preceding years'.1 And the important thing about suffering during the Industrial Revolution was that it brought with it its own solution: increasing productivity in industry and agriculture, and, in society, faith that social conditions should and could be improved, and that economic progress was inevitable. 'Amidst the varied reflections which the nineteenth century is in the habit of making on its condition and its prospects', wrote J. A. Froude later in the century, 'there is one common opinion in which all parties coincide-that we live in an era of progress ... in every department of life-in its business and in its pleasures, in its beliefs and in its theories, in its material developments and in its spiritual convictions-we thank God that we are not like our fathers. And while we admit their merits, making allowance for their disadvantages, we do not blind ourselves in mistaken modesty to our own immeasurable superiority.'2 The new attitude to social problems that emerged with the industrial revolution was that ills should be identified, examined, analysed, publicized and remedied, either by voluntary or legislative action. Thus evils that had long existed-child labour, for example-and had long been accepted as inevitable, were regarded as new ills to be remedied rather than as old ills to be endured. It was during the industrial revolution, moreover, and largely because of the economic opportunities it afforded to working class women, that there was the beginning of that most important and most beneficial of all the social revolutions of the last two centuries, the emancipation of women.

Nuffield College, Oxford

1 F. C. Mather, Public Order in the Age of the Chartists (Manchester University Press, 1959), PP. 12-13. 2 J. A. Froude, Short Studies on Great Subjects (London, 1907 ed.), vol. III, 'On Progress', pp. I 49-50.