<!-- image -->

## Labor History

ISSN: 0023-656X (Print) 1469-9702 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/clah20

## Walter Reuther, the UAW, and the dilemmas of automation

## David Steigerwald

To cite this article: David Steigerwald (2010) Walter Reuther, the UAW, and the dilemmas of automation, Labor History, 51:3, 429-453, DOI: 10.1080/0023656X.2010.508376

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/0023656X.2010.508376

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 15 Sep 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 844

View related articles

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Walter Reuther, the UAW, and the dilemmas of automation

David Steigerwald*

Ohio State University

Historians have slighted the importance of automation both as a cause of organized labor's decline in America and as a lively issue among labor leaders in the early post-WWII period. In part, this disregard stems from labor's own ambivalence about technological change. This essay considers that ambivalence by looking at Walter Reuther and the United Auto Workers. Reuther and his colleagues shared widespread hopes that the new production processes would relieve the burdens of assembly-line work and increase the working class's access to cultivated leisure. At the same time, however, they recognized that unchecked technological change would generate a wave of structural unemployment by displacing experienced workers while denying new, unskilled workers necessary jobs. Reuther and his colleagues feared that automation in this form would destroy the consumer capacity that the working class had so recently acquired, and in so doing would undermine the health of the entire economy. Reuther's strategy, therefore, was not to resist automation but to manage its implementation through both collective bargaining and progressive political victories.

It was one of those innumerable sessions that probably bore even those who convene them. Still, this December 1956 interview of Labor Department officials before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization of the Congressional Joint Economic Committee was an odd scene. The issue, industrial automation, was in the news. This was the second time in two years it had reached the congressional agenda. The Subcommittee's economist, William Moore, called attention to the recent wildcat strike against Standard Motors in England, which had erupted over the company's automation plans. Moore asked Assistant Secretary of Labor for Employment and Manpower Rocco Siciliano whether he knew of any similar actions in the United States. When both Siciliano and Leon Greenberg, who studied technological change for the Bureau of Labor Statistics, answered that they knew of no such disputes, Moore observed that 'apparently our labor in this country is rather more willing to accept these radical changes'. More than that, Siciliano replied: 'I would like to say that here is a complete willingness, so far as we have been able to see, of acceptance of technological change on the part of both labor and management'. 1

Siciliano was half right. American unions never launched a militant attack on those technological changes that were gathered under the name 'automation', even though automation undeniably contributed to the relative decline in

manufacturing employment between 1955 and 1965, and marked, therefore, the beginning of organized labor's general decline in America. Yet it was quite wrong to speak of organized labor's 'complete willingness' to accept 'technological change' when as late as 1963 the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organisations' (AFL-CIO) convention singled it out as the most serious problem facing organized labor. Through both collective bargaining and political action organized labor deployed a strategy designed to manage, rather than defy, technological change. Because historians have slighted automation's role in labor's decline and underestimated the extent to which American labor leaders were alarmed about it, it is a useful exercise in itself to take another look at the so-called 'automation hysteria', but the real trick is to explain why Siciliano was half right. 2

To get at that issue, I want to focus on Walter Reuther and his colleagues in the United Auto Workers (UAW) leadership. To Reuther and his colleagues, technological change was never an either-or choice, and their strategies for dealing with it were both varied and complex. They were concerned about the potential impact of automation from the start and struggled with increasing seriousness for a decade and a half to craft effective policies to ameliorate automation's harsh consequences, ultimately to no avail. To suggest that they worked hard to mitigate automation's costs for labor is to imply that UAW officials accepted the inevitability of technological change in the industry - a point that David F. Noble made long ago and that requires explanation. Rather than holding them up to a purist's standard of labor resistance, however, I am more impressed with the way UAW officials forthrightly tried to deal with the problems of displacement, unemployment and community destruction. That response developed in three stages, which carried Reuther from an initial guardedness, to efforts to deal with the issue through collective bargaining, to the realization that only a full-blown social-democratic national policy could arrest the mounting human toll of technological displacement. They failed in the end anyway, spurned by the very liberals whose support they expected. Given the way the nation's legal and political system were stacked against labor's control at the point of production - to say nothing of the nation's cultural infatuation with technological 'progress' - it seems fairest to say that Reuther was 'damned if he did, and damned if he didn't'. In that case, practical measures designed to deliver tangible help to human beings in distress seems a sensible end, and the union's failure to deliver much even along those lines was less as a commentary on Walter Reuther and the UAW than on the nation as a whole.

## Ambivalence, or why Rocco Siciliano was half right

It is true that the UAW's opening strategy, which was set roughly between 1950 and 1955, was cautious and of the sort that federal officials might interpret as 'a complete willingness' to accept technological change. Reuther's instincts, born as they were from his Veblenian productionist philosophy, were never hostile to technological change, as both Nelson Lichtenstein and David Noble have pointed out. 3 What has not been well understood is how deeply Reuther and his chief aides on this issue, Jack Conway and Nat Weinberg, shared the humanistic hope, now mostly forgotten but widespread in the early postwar period, that technological change would end the

drudgery of industrial work and increase the leisure time in which working-class people could cultivate the higher ends of life.

During the 1950s, the term automation was a catch-all to describe a wide variety of technological processes. So-called Detroit automation was distinguished from, say, the electronic information technologies then being installed in office work, because it was a means of handling, fabricating, and moving discrete parts by interlocking 'transfer' machines. Whereas computers generated plenty of talk and a good deal of angst - about 'thinking machines', Detroit's transfer-machine technology was more evolutionary than revolutionary. Single machines with several machine tools that performed separate tasks had been in use in auto-related shops in the 1930s. These multi-task machines were essential components of an automated line, but they required human beings to inspect the parts and move them from one tooling machine to the other. The next step was the adoption of transfer machines to link the tooling machines, so that a part could move along without a worker touching it. Not only did they move product from one workstation to the next, but the transfer machines could turn and adjust the piece to meet the precise angles necessary for machining. Following the example Ford set at its new Cleveland-area Brook Park engine plant in 1951, automakers consolidated their tooling machines, sometimes by a rolling belt, sometimes much more closely, into one continuous, automated line. Individual workers supervised multi-station, push-button 'servo-mechanisms' that performed a series of operations, from drilling cylinder bolt holes to drilling and countersinking valve cover holes and reaming sparkplug holes, all at extremely close tolerances. 4

Theoretically then, Detroit automation was no abrupt break with the past. It simply extended the first principles of Fordist production: continuous flow and de-skilling of labor. Nat Weinberg, the UAW's point man on automation, recognized as much when he explained without trepidation in the early 1950s that Detroit automation 'represents the final flowering of the assembly line principle'. 5

The new transfer machines, however, were not just fancy conveyor belts. By the mid-1950s, a single servo-mechanism controlled a battery of machines and was capable of processing information on its own. Typically only one worker was needed to push buttons and otherwise babysit the machine. However consistent transfer machinery was with the assembly line's old logic, it marked a new stage in the processes of mass production in its potential to displace workers. Those who previously handled and moved parts were rendered obsolete. So too were machinists, press operators, and other skilled workers who previously had been responsible for the most intricate parts of an automobile. 6

Automakers' motives, consistently and unambiguously stated, were to reduce labor costs, improve quality, and increase production. Doing so, they claimed, was necessary both to product development and to competitive advantage in a dog-eat-dog industry. 7 As had always been the case with US automakers, competitive advantage was extracted out of labor. Workers were eliminated in each stage of the automation process. If there is no smoking-gun evidence that the automakers saw automation as a means for ridding themselves of the UAW, there is cause for suspicion. As Stephen Meyer has noted, the first of the new transfer machines were installed in Buick plants soon after the great strike of 1945-46 was settled. In the absence of any serious external factors such as international

competition, it could not have been coincidental that aggressive technological change corresponded to the high point of union strength. That oft-told tale of Walter Reuther's exchange at Brook Park with a Ford executive who sardonically asked him how these new machines would pay union dues also hinted at an overt anti-union strategy. Reuther's retort - 'How are these machines going to buy your cars?' - was just as portentous. UAW officials were clear from the start that automation would result in enormous reductions in labor. In his earliest general statement to the members on the issue, Reuther warned that 'radical productivity increases' could very easily mean 'unemployment and misery instead of security and abundance'. 8

It is easy to see why Reuther feared 'unemployment and misery'. The intriguing question is why he thought automation could bring 'security and abundance'. Why was there any ambivalence at all among UAW officials toward automation?

Though Reuther's view of technological change was indeed embedded in productionist thinking born in the prewar 'age of scarcity', his understanding of automation was more attuned to the prevailing sensibilities of the postwar 'age of abundance'. He and his colleagues shared the widely aired hopes that automation could reduce the drudgery of mass-production work and increase leisure time while still generating abundance for all. Jack Conway, who headed the UAW's Automation Committee, summed up labor's version: 'We do not fear the automatic machine. We welcome better tools that take the danger and drudgery out of our work. What we oppose is blind, irresponsible use of these new tools.' 9

The point of departure for those who thought that automation might be put to humane ends was the common knowledge that industrial labor as it had been practiced was unrelenting, repetitive, and boring - in a word, alienating. This was not just the romantic view of Marxist humanists. Virtually every sociological study of factory workers in the two decades following the war came to that conclusion, and if survey comments can be taken at face value, so too did most line workers. As rural Americans streamed to the cities by the millions in search of production jobs, those who held such jobs often spoke, movingly and perceptively, of the physical depletion, the monotony, and the brainlessness of assembly-line work. Virtually the only contented workers in postwar auto plants had jobs that were not tied to the line, such as general repair work. Even these were dead-end jobs, because the chances of a line worker moving up to foreman, much less to the office, were never good. It was true that the era's autoworkers had seen a substantial increase in real wages and had joined in the affluent society, but 'the plain truth is that factory work is degrading', as Harvey Swados wrote. Far from the fat-and-happy workers one found in the national stereotype, the men with whom Swados worked in 1956 'felt like trapped animals'. Ely Chinoy rendered a similarly bleak conclusion: 'They are alienated', he said of the autoworkers. The only enthusiasm most could muster was to offer an oft-heard note of resignation: '''A job's a job'''. 10

If automated machinery could reduce the toil and tedium of the assembly line, then it was more blessing than curse. While management and Chamber of Commerce types predictably blathered about a future of limitless abundance, two more serious lines of discourse appeared among more disinterested observers. Automation had the potential of reversing, if not destroying altogether, a half-century of Taylorism. By removing the worker from the task of regulating the machine at a specific point, automation supposedly would reduce the number of specialized operations and

recombine those that remained; work, fractured under the Taylorist division of labor, would be reunified. Automation would then encourage the revival of individual skills - the French labor sociologist Georges Friedmann predicted the emergence of a new artisan class - and as they made the jump from the Taylorist system to the automated plant, production workers would enjoy an 'upgrading' of skill levels. As one UAW official mused to Edward B. Shils, 'the hand-trucker of today, replaced by the conveyor belt, might become tomorrow's electronic engineer'. All the elements of alienated labor - the division of task; the loss of autonomy; the degradation of skill - might well be reversed in a new, automated order. 11

Running directly aside these sanguine predictions of the end of drudgery was a parallel discourse that revolved around the cultural consequences of contemporary work. One of the most consistent ingredients in early postwar US thought assumed that because work had become meaningless, Americans would have to invest leisure with creative energies lest they simply become automatons of consumption. Postwar Americans indisputably had more time to consume more goods than any previous general population, and it was obvious that they were consuming with gusto. For a people whose collective mythology long had emphasized the moral centrality of work, the rise of the 'leisure ethic' meant nothing less than the abandonment, if not the betrayal, of the USA's core values. The hard reality was that no one wanted to return to the old days of scarcity when the work ethic actually made sense. One of the great problems of the day, accordingly, which took on real urgency given the impending expansion of automated production, was how to reorganize American values so that leisure became the repository of meaning, the realm of the well-led life. Americans had to recognize, Sebastian de Grazia wrote as he pointed to the 'great fracture' between the work ethic and the rise of leisure, that 'work may make man stoop-shouldered or rich. It may even ennoble him. Leisure perfects him.' 12

If De Grazia was right, then automation promised to be an enormous boon to leisurely 'perfection'. Automation might allow 'scholars to pursue their research, writers to write, painters to paint, and thinkers to think', wrote George Soule. William Faunce, a close student of the autoworker, was heartened to see in surveys that workers promised reduced hours often spoke about going back to school. 'It may be important for curriculum planners to recognize that the citizen in the automated industrial community may have an increasing amount of leisure time at his disposal', he wrote. David Riesman, who concluded The Lonely Crowd with a long section dedicated to 'consider[ing] the possibility that, if the other-directed is to be made free, it will not be by work but by play', similarly called for the establishment of 'avocational counselors' to teach people to acquire 'a more comfortable leisure life'. 13

Riesman did not hold this facile view for long. His own survey research turned up general dissatisfaction with leisure as it was conventionally practiced, and to his astonishment, he and his research team kept bumping into people who preferred to work longer hours than to twiddle their thumbs in empty time. Union workers who had been liberated into shorter workweeks often responded, not by going back to school, as Faunce had hoped, but by taking a second or even a third job. Searching for some explanation, Riesman continued to argue that these workers were not committed to the work ethic. Work was not an 'active presence' in their lives, but not

working was felt as 'an active absence'. 14 Admitting his changing views, he confessed that 'my collaborators and I in The Lonely Crowd took it for granted that it was impossible to reverse the trend towards automation; . . . [with] the meaning of life to be sought henceforth in the creative use of leisure. We failed to see . . . that there would come a point where additional increments of leisure would prove more stultifying than satisfying and that the mass of men would be incapable of absorbing any more.' The logical conclusion was that making 'leisure more meaningful' required making 'work more demanding'. If automation could indeed make work more meaningful, as its advocates believed, then maybe it would be, paradoxically, the solution to the very problem of increased leisure time that it was causing. 15

This was the atmosphere out of which Walter Reuther and his UAW colleagues shaped their responses to automation. To some extent, Reuther's youthful enthusiasm for an abundance of production fit seamlessly with these postwar calls for a leisure ethic, and yet as a serious student of work, he understood, as Riesman eventually did, that work still mattered. The yearning for plenty, always in tension with the yearning to work, made him instinctively wary of the slick talk of a new 'leisure ethic'; needless to say as well, he was not in a mood to trust that the automakers had any workers' paradise in mind when they deployed their fancy machines. So when the automation crisis began, and the rather hysterical MIT physicist Norbert Weiner approached him with dire warnings about the 'catastrophic' elimination of workers, Reuther was attentive and willing to have Weiner's counsel. Meanwhile, Reuther treated early automation like business as usual. The automatic transfer machinery that Ford unlocked at Brook Park warranted attention, but no more than a dozen other concerns. To keep an eye on technological developments, Nat Weinberg, a long-time Reuther associate and head of the UAW's Research Department, convened a special staff committee on automation under Jack Conway. Their early considerations reflected no particular urgency. In reply to a letter from an AFL-CIO colleague who urged more aggressive action against automation on the grounds that it 'may turn human beings into agents of machinery', Weinberg invoked the optimistic predictions about upgrading: 'My own opinion is that [automation] may do the reverse for those workers now employed in repetitive machine operations. They will be controlling batteries of machines . . . instead of being controlled themselves.' By the time he formulated an official position on the issue in 1954, Reuther had blended his various interests and concerns into an entirely coherent position. 'Automation must be met sanely and constructively', he announced, 'so that the miracle of mass production - and the ever greater abundance made possible by automation - can find expression in the lives of people through improved economic security and a fuller share of happiness and human dignity'. 16

The tricky business of balancing leisure with work played itself out in the UAW position on the shorter week. The shorter week was almost constantly discussed throughout the union during the period, but Reuther never was whole-heartedly committed to it. Ronald Edsforth has argued that Reuther simply did not think this was an issue he could win on, and the most that can be said was that he went along with George Meany and other labor leaders when they called for shorter hours. He was never above using the issue to suit immediate interests. He had included a 30-hour week in his list of goals as he fought for control of the UAW after the war

but dropped it after he consolidated power. When the leftwing Local 600 at Ford's River Rouge took up the 30-40 cause in 1948 - thirty hours work for forty hours' pay - Reuther derided it as a Communist effort to slow production and undermine the Marshall Plan. Besides, he argued, 'our basic fight is to get the purchasing power to buy the things we make. . . . We don't want more leisure. We want more goods, and when we have enough goods, then we will fight for more leisure.' As they began to plot their approach to upcoming congressional hearings in 1955, UAW officials momentarily revived the shorter week. Reuther explained to a meeting of fellow labor leaders that 'real leisure means leisure through a rational reduction in the work week'. By the early 1960s, he was calling for a 'flexible work week', in which hours would be reduced in slumping industries but kept at 40 hours elsewhere. When the shorter-hours issue resurfaced in auto negotiations in 1963, union leadership substituted longer vacations and more paid holidays for the 30-hour week. 17

When Reuther demanded 'more goods' rather than more leisure, he sounded like Sam Gompers, but rather more like David Riesman, he worried that US values had not adjusted to the new age of affluence. It was not that he opposed more leisure; he doubted that Americans were prepared for the amount of time on their hands that many predicted they were going to get, ready or not. Just as Riesman and other social scientists were talking of forming 'academies of leisure', Reuther and Weinberg considered calling for a committee of experts, drawn from outside the union, to advise them 'with respect to the use of leisure time'. If nothing else, Weinberg mused in 1957, union-sponsored educational activities geared toward the promotion of creative leisure would deflect charges that in pushing the shorter week 'what we are really after is not more leisure but more overtime pay'. 18

Nothing much came of the idea, but the cultural conundrum was clearly on their minds in the late 1950s. In a 1957 interview on Edward R. Murrow's See It Now program, Reuther predicted that, given the accelerated pace of technological change, 'the four-day week will be with us much quicker than we realize, . . . long before we can use it intelligently'. Americans seemed bent on soothing their insecurity with 'bath tubs and plumbing and radio and TVs', when the nation really 'ought to find a way to enable people to grow . . . culturally and spiritually and intellectually'. However nice a four-day week would be, given the present state of US culture, labor continued to hold more dignity than leisure, and for that reason it was more important to ensure that all willing and able people had the opportunity to work through a national full-employment policy. As Nat Weinberg maintained in a long letter to Robert Theobald toward the end of the automation crisis in the mid-1960s, full employment remained a vital goal because a meaningful life can 'be obtained only by doing one's share of society's work'. If a well-led life required labor, a shorter workweek, increased school ages, longer vacations, and more holidays -all made possible by labor-saving technology -only made realizing a meaningful existence more problematic. The more leisure, the less time a person had 'to feel that he is participating in society's work and contributing to the fund of wealth from which he draws his own sustenance'. After all, unemployment was leisure of a sort. Welfare dependency was leisure of a sort. But surely it would be better to work. 19

## From the bargaining table to the political process

Reuther's ambivalent sense that automated abundance was desirable but possibly destructive caught the public mood precisely. Even as the talk about the blissful new era of leisure was making the rounds, a fair amount of public fear over 'thinking machines' and 'automatons' appeared. Public anxiety grew in response to oft-heard pronouncements - sometimes delivered as warnings, sometimes with the celebratory enthusiasm of boosters - that a new age, a 'second industrial revolution', was at hand. Since it had become a common theme, UAW officials took it up, if for no other reason than its rhetorical value. If management liked to boast about the Brave New World, labor was more than willing to take the point and warn about the dangers of human obsolescence. It could be disconcerting to hear experts brag, as Harvard management professor and automation consultant John Diebold did, that automatic machinery meant that 'production processes do not have . . . to take into account the human limitations of the human worker'. 20 To play along with the boosters and agree that automation was unprecedented allowed UAW officials to scratch at public fears, and they deployed that claim repeatedly. 'We have been told so often that automation is going to bring on the ''Second Industrial Revolution''', Reuther maintained in his first congressional testimony on the issue, 'that there is, perhaps, a danger that we may dismiss the warning as a catch phrase, and lose sight of the fact that, not only the technique, but the philosophy is revolutionary.' In its potential for inducing enormous dislocation, automation was not altogether different from the First Industrial Revolution, the benefits of which, Reuther reminded the congressmen, took decades to become apparent. In the meantime 'greedy, ruthless employers' fattened on the 'privation, misery, and ruthless exploitation [of] millions of working people', but things could well be worse this time around. No matter how refined machines were during the First Industrial Revolution, 'they still required workers to operate and control them'. By contrast, 'the revolutionary change produced by automation is its tendency to displace the worker entirely'. 21

For the UAW, automation was not just a public-relations game. In late 1955 and the first half of 1956, alone, Weinberg's committee noted, 150,000 auto workers had been laid off nationwide. Detroit's unemployment was at 8.3%, even though these were banner years for auto sales. Automation was the main suspect. The UAW's strategy was to use the automation crisis as an opportunity to achieve longheld goals, beginning with the guaranteed annual wage. Increasingly aware that automation was destructive, union leaders tried to control the pace and implementation of technological change through the collective bargaining process. 22

The first step was to reframe the long-time goal of the guaranteed annual wage against the backdrop of automation. Because the GAW was essentially a demand that the companies provide continued income for laid-off employees, it bore directly on the problem of displaced workers. The guaranteed wage, as one committee report maintained, was 'the most essential element' in providing 'employment and income security'; it would 'serve as a regulator of the process of technological change, tending to minimize its disruptive consequences'. The hope was that the GAW would prevent the automakers from introducing new technologies at times when mass layoffs might result and wait instead for periods of growth when displaced employees could be absorbed into other jobs. Weinberg and his committee colleagues also figured that management would be less likely to move operations wholesale from old

plants to new ones. Because it imposed a 'greater degree of social responsibility' on the companies, the GAW was a weapon against the broad catastrophe of community collapse: 'In the absence of the guaranteed wage, irresponsible corporate decentralization policies, accentuated by the introduction of automation, would leave thousands of workers stranded and give rise to . . . ghost towns'. The GAW would provide a modest cushion to displaced workers, who might then be able to retrain or look for new work with something less than desperation, while their families and communities would be similarly assured of some sustenance. For these important reasons, 'the shorter workweek will take its place at the top of our collective bargaining agenda' only 'after the guaranteed annual wage has been secured'. 23

Though management dug its heels in on the GAW, UAW persistence won piecemeal concessions that eventually wound up in perhaps the union's most tangible gains in the whole messy business of automation. Beginning in 1955, Ford began contributing to a trust fund on which laid-off workers could draw for up to six months. Nelson Lichtenstein has noted that while this was not exactly the guaranteed wage the union had in mind, Reuther pressed the issue over the next decade and through four contracts. Eventually the supplementary unemployment benefits (SUB) added to regular unemployment provided UAW workers at Big Three companies 95% of their regular pay over an entire year, and the program was initiated in rubber, steel, and other industries. Paying out some US$86 million to autoworkers in its first three years and almost US$0.25 billion when steel and rubber workers were added together, SUB offered some of the extended security that the AFL-CIO sought for displaced workers, though, as Reuther put it in 1961, 'that instability has by no means disappeared'. Reuther argued that along with the so-called Armour Plan that had set up an independently managed 'Automation Fund' for displaced meatpackers, SUB was a good example of the sort of positive steps that labor and management might take together to address a serious problem, if only management would act in good faith. 24

Other problems remained on the bargaining table. Even under the best circumstances when workers transferred to new plants or moved into new jobs, job classifications and wage rates were being kept static. While increasingly skeptical about upgrading - just ' how does the hand trucker become an electronics engineer?' Reuther liked to ask - the automation committee turned corporate rhetoric to union purposes and argued that automated jobs usually required more responsibility and therefore deserved an upward revision of wage rates. Seniority rules were also at issue. Indeed, the plight of older workers was heartbreaking, since companies had little incentive to retrain them for the new automated plants, and older workers, with homes and children, had little latitude to pick up and move. As they existed in the mid 1950s, the union contracts contained seniority rules that were too narrowly defined by job classification and plant assignment; they were 'increasingly obsolete and harmful to our membership', a UAW-CIO report insisted, and needed to be broadened. 25

Precisely because the much-ballyhooed upgrading did not materialize, the problems of job classifications, seniority rules and the like only deepened. At the height of the automation crisis in the early 1960s and after a disappointing round of negotiations with the automakers in 1961, Weinberg lamented that 'there is

little hope' for creating new jobs for those older displaced workers. However, given the rising educational level of younger workers, production workers in the future could be moved into white-collar jobs given some 'systematic planning' on the part of the companies. Hoping to tie the idea to the Kennedy Administration's Manpower Development and Training Act, Reuther dispatched dozens of letters to presidents of companies with UAW representation beseeching them to institutionalize a system for blue-collar movement into white-collar ranks. Noting that production employment in durable goods had dropped more than 1.5 million between 1953 and 1961 while non-production employment rose by nearly a halfmillion, he argued that there was no longer any reason why blue-collar workers at the very least could not handle routine office work. 'Every production worker employed by your corporation who is shifted to a white collar job means one less worker in danger of displacement by the advance of technology within your plants', Reuther wrote. 26

Soured on the notion that automation would upgrade production skills, Reuther and Weinberg also began to question the predictions that white-collar jobs would take up the slack of declining production employment. The diligent scholar Ida R. Hoos, whom they read, was showing consistently that white-collar work was even more vulnerable to automation than assembly-line work. Thus it was only a bit surprising when in 1962 and 1963, more blue-collar than white-collar jobs were added nationally for the first time since 1951. Weinberg reported to Reuther that the statistics 'call into question the forecasts' that white-collar employment growth would be sufficient to replace lost production jobs. Not only was the whole notion of skill upgrading coming into doubt, but so too the first studies of the extent of alienation among workers in automated plants were emerging, and to decidedly mixed results. Though a proponent of the upgrading thesis, Bob Blauner depicted autoworkers as the most alienated of the four groups he studied, a finding that reinforced William Faunce's previous assertions that Detroit automation made individual workers more isolated and less happy. 27

This is a crucial point. If the promise of automation was quickly spoiling, if skill upgrading and de-alienation were shams, then all of the hard work behind the GAW and even the promotion of the shorter week were merely holding actions. Short of an all-out resistance to technological change, something Reuther was not apt to engage in, the only alternative strategy to technological displacement lay in broad political action. Unable to prevent the technological transformation of the workplace, Reuther was drawn increasingly toward policies designed to expand consumer demand. The second half of that famous exchange in Cleveland took on accumulating importance. If machines continued to replace production workers, who, indeed, would buy those cars? It made sense that increased demand would keep autoworkers on the job, but even if such a strategy worked, it did nothing to manage, much less arrest, technological change.

## The 'automation hysteria' and the liberal response

The paradox between production and consumption was on Reuther's mind as he recalled that Cleveland exchange to Edward R. Murrow. He explained that 'we can make great progress in the production of automated equipment, electronics, and all

that, but we're still going to have to make the consumers the old-fashioned way'. The 'old-fashioned way' meant keeping people working and paying them adequately. If UAW officials remained determined to do what they could in the auto industry, by the late 1950s they recognized that aggregate demand required federal involvement on a number of fronts. It was obvious, as Reuther repeatedly said, that collective bargaining could not handle 'the full burden of dealing with unemployment [or] adjustment to technological change'. At that point, therefore, the automation crisis demanded an expansive social democracy. 28

As early as 1956, Nat Weinberg laid out a comprehensive vision of federal involvement that broke governmental efforts down into three parts. First, Weinberg recommended a national labor policy of full employment accompanied by an increased minimum wage, higher pensions, and a repeal of Taft-Hartley's 'statutory handicaps' on unions. With the auto industry firmly in mind, he called as well for government intervention in pricing, particularly 'because automation . . . has made its greatest inroads into industries where prices are fixed by corporate fiat rather than competition'. Finally, he insisted on federal investment in 'distressed communities'. For displaced workers willing to relocate, travel and relocation allowances should be provided; for those left behind, the government should provide employment, because to do otherwise 'implies that the responsibility for adjustment to automation rests primarily on the worker, to whom mobility often means uprooting'. 29

None of this ambitious agenda was likely to see the light of day during the Eisenhower years. Reuther and his colleagues expected more from the Kennedy administration, especially when the presidential changeover corresponded to the full outbreak of the 'hysteria'. As Kennedy prepared to assume office, automation was becoming the most pressing economic issue because of the convergence of three trends: the declining relative employment in manufacturing; the migration of rural people into the industrial cities; and the first wave of baby boomers coming of working age.

What Kennedy intended to do about automation, however, was by no means clear. Automation had figured directly into national debates over the seemingly intractable unemployment that plagued the nation from 1957 to the mid 1960s. On one side, 'structuralists' blamed automation for displacing workers, especially older ones, and for eliminating unskilled jobs that might otherwise have been taken up by poorly educated rural migrants and the swelling number of baby boomers entering the workforce. Business leaders and conservative economists argued by contrast that technological progress always created more jobs than it destroyed. By the early 1960s, this line of argument reappeared in the 'expansionist' school, which maintained that the unemployment problem, regardless of its roots, was best dealt with through pro-growth Keynesianism that encouraged expanded hiring. Because it placed blame for high unemployment on technological change initiated by thoughtless corporations, the structuralist analysis recommended fairly radical anti-corporate measures. The expansionist position, meanwhile, suggested that 'growth' alone could cure all ills.

We know that Walter Heller, as head of the Council of Economic Advisors, had begun to coax Kennedy toward the expansionist view that general growth, nudged along with tax cuts, would provide a necessary stimulant to address

structural unemployment. It did not really matter to Heller what sort of jobs were made available; the important thing -or at least the issue that the federal government could most readily address - was that economic growth would generate jobs and, in turn, more growth. As Allan Matusow explained some years ago, Kennedy was initially skeptical of Heller's tax-cut, deficit-spending Keynesianism, but the stock-market plunge of late May 1962 and the steel crisis pushed Kennedy into Heller's lap. Expansionism was too seductive to resist; after all, it promised to cure the most serious ills while giving money back to voters and businesses. No largescale federal intervention into business practices, such as Weinberg envisioned, was necessary - not that anyone in either the Kennedy or Johnson administrations ever seriously considered doing so. 30

Still, Kennedy Administration officials were not immediately sold on the expansionist line, in no small way because the facts seemed to support the structuralist case. In 1960, it was hard to deny that automation was thinning the ranks of unionized production workers. Employment in oil refining fell from 153,000 to 113,900 from 1957 to 1964; from 1955 to 1966, the petroleum industry shed over 30% of its workers but increased its productivity 69%. Overall, the UAW reported 160,000 autoworkers displaced between 1947 and 1960; production employment dipped 3% while productivity increased 50%. Retirements, displacements, and jobs not re-filled cost the union nearly a half million members between 1955 and 1963 and the Steelworkers another 140,000. The International Union of Electrical, Machine, and Radio Workers claimed that 200,000 workers had been displaced and that total employment in its related industries had decreased by more than a half million. US railroads shed 50% of their workforces between 1947 and 1961. Across industry lines, certain skilled crafts - arc welding, presswork, tool-and-die work in general - came under heavy pressure. From 1957 to 1961, 1.1 million production jobs were lost in the USA, though output per man-hour went up 18%. According to Arthur Goldberg, Secretary of Labor in the Kennedy administration, 900,000 manufacturing jobs were lost in 1960 alone. In spite of vigorous organizing drives by some of the major unions, overall membership was not increasing and the percentage of the organized workforce had begun its historic decline. Union officials were not the only ones to notice. 'Blue-collar workers engaged in repetitive tasks, who have long constituted a major part of the . . . industrial union,' wrote University of Chicago Professor Joel Seidman, 'were among those most vulnerable to the new technology.' Consequently, 'it is apparent that the strength of the labor movement has been eroded.' 31

At the same time, unemployment levels were proving distressingly stubborn. The nation underwent three recessions during Eisenhower's presidency and in each recovery the unemployment rate never returned to its pre-recession level. When Kennedy assumed office, the rate was 6.7%; long-term unemployment was over two million, its post-war high to that point . Was it just a coincidence that those levels corresponded to the rapid loss of manufacturing jobs? Labor Department economists mostly agreed at that point that 'structural unemployment', unemployment caused by a mismatch between available jobs and the skills and abilities of available workers, was the principal ingredient in the persistently high rates. The best explanation for the increasing long-term unemployment was 'the profound effect of our changing technology', as one BLS economist put it. 32

Against an already dour situation, millions of rural migrants to industrial cities and the first wave of baby boomers, an estimated 13.5 million of whom were expected to hit the labor market in the 1960s, swelled the numbers of the expected victims of structural unemployment. Educational levels for African-Americans were well below the median for whites, and in the aggregate, roughly 25% of all young workers poised to enter the workforce were high-school dropouts. Any young worker without developed skills faced bleak prospects. The economy would have to create millions of jobs per year in order to accommodate a labor force that was annually adding 1,350,000 to millions of displaced workers. 33

Initially, it looked as though the Kennedy administration would earnestly address technological displacement. In his maiden economic address to Congress, the President seemed to echo labor's position. In the face of an expanding labor force, he maintained, the nation's economy was persistently failing to generate adequate growth in spite of notable productivity gains. This gap between growth and productivity indicated a structural problem, and consequently, Kennedy predicted, 'the problem of unused potential will remain' beyond the recession. Among his recommendations was the Area Redevelopment Act, which combined loans for private investment in troubled areas and, if need be, government jobs as well - the very sort of directed investment that Weinberg had been suggesting. Kennedy also called for an increased minimum wage. Because 'rapid technological change is resulting in serious employment dislocations', the President called for an ad-hoc Labor-Management Committee to study the effects of automation. Weinberg himself might have written the speech - except for two points that turned out to indicate the eventual course of administration policy. Kennedy promised to increase depreciation allowances to encourage 'modernization' and though he was less firm about it than Eisenhower had been, he too linked wage increases to inflation. 34

Kennedy thus wrung one hand over automation while giving tax breaks to companies that automated with the other. It was hardly surprising that the LaborManagement Committee convened with an unfocused agenda and vast differences of interest among its 21 members. With seven representatives from management, seven from labor (including Reuther), and five experts representing 'the public', the committee seemed intended to give the impression, as Nat Weinberg quipped, that 'something is being done about automation'. To his credit, Labor Secretary Goldberg managed to keep automation central to the committee's work, at least initially. With the Labor Department estimating that it would take 7 million new jobs in 1962 to pull unemployment down to 4%, the Secretary was convinced that structural obstacles had to be overcome. 35

Nonetheless, Weinberg's cynicism was confirmed. The task force report had all the decisiveness that one expects from 'balanced' governmental committees. Released in January 1962, the committee's conclusions could hardly have been more predictable: that 'first, automation and technological progress are essential to the general welfare'; that 'progress can and must be achieved without the sacrifice of human values'; and that squaring these two 'depends upon a combination of private and governmental action'. Though the report's content reflected a strong labor influence, there were clues that the expansionist camp was gaining ground on the structuralists. The first cause of unemployment, according to the committee, was not automation but slack growth; moreover, the report claimed that 'the exact extent of

unemployment attributable to automation and technological change is unknown'. The report concluded that there were too many independent factors in unemployment to parse out the links to technological change: the boomer-led expansion of the labor force; international competition; the shift toward white-collar jobs and the education gap; racial discrimination; rural migration; and, finally, the unwillingness or inability of some workers to relocate. Given that ambiguity, 'policies which will promote a high rate of growth' should have priority. Otherwise, the committee followed that recommendation with a list that was fairly true to UAW appeals. It called for improved education and vocational training; direct support for displaced workers; management efforts to cushion displacement; mobility of pensions and seniority; and 'vigorous and unremitting efforts . . . to eliminate discrimination in employment because of race, creed, age, or sex'. The committee's work yielded legislative fruit in the form of the Manpower Development and Training Act, which aimed at using local programs to retrain some 70,000 workers over a three-year period. 36

From the Kennedy years to the early Great Society, Reuther, Weinberg and their AFL-CIO colleagues seemed to have the best of both worlds: administrations apparently committed both to dealing seriously with structural unemployment and boosting demand. They never seriously questioned the expansionists' growth thesis. Not only did they support the proposed tax cut, but they called for a variety of other stimulative measures, particularly aimed at low-income people, such as tax credits and a guaranteed household income. They were critical of opposing ideas. Weinberg worried, for example, that John Kenneth Galbraith would insinuate his call for less consumption and more public works into Kennedy policy. The doctrine was 'economically wrong and politically dangerous' -among other reasons because Galbraith greatly exaggerated the extent of affluence. Similarly, Weinberg insisted that warnings that expansionist policies were inherently inflationary were just wrong. In a real sense, UAW strategists had begun to look for federal policy to humanize the technological fallout, which in itself was evidence that they no longer believed that collective bargaining could do so. Thus expanding consumer demand went along with expanded education, expanded unemployment benefits and expanded re-training programs. 'A high level of demand would serve both to minimize the magnitude of adjustment problems arising from technological change,' Weinberg reasoned, 'and to facilitate the adjustment process.' 37

There were significant dangers in blending these two positions together, and there is no indication that Reuther or Weinberg appreciated them. The strategy of using social policy to address technological displacement could work only so long as reform liberalism was in power. For that matter, it would work only so long as the issue remained in liberal sights. When the mid-1960s economy began to heat up a result of the 1964 tax cut, Vietnam War-related defense spending, and the military absorption of millions of young men from the labor force - Johnson Administration officials could simply ignore the vexatious issue of technological change. Once 'growth' became the watchword of economic policy, automation as a key issue was abandoned.

This important shift in priorities ran its course through the debates over structural unemployment. Years of trying to locate automation's direct responsibility for persistent unemployment simply had not borne enough empirical fruit to suit

Ewan Clague, Bureau of Labor Statistics commissioner throughout the automation crisis. For several years, in fact, Weinberg and AFL-CIO Research Director Stanley Ruttenberg had been at loggerheads with Clague over a number of issues that had direct effects on collective bargaining agreements. BLS decisions to revise the calculation formulae for both the Consumer Price Index and productivity rates had immediate consequences on union escalator and improvement clauses, respectively. 38

The calculations for productivity rates were central to the automation issue and consumed a good deal of Weinberg's attention. Labor insisted that the only worthwhile measure of productivity was output per man-hour, and it followed that an increasing rate could be taken as fair evidence of the extent of automation. In 1959, Clague supervised a productivity study that employed a number of trend analyses, that, according to Weinberg, blurred and downplayed the accelerating rate of productivity since 1947, which the report concluded had run at 3.1% annually. Weinberg charged that Clague had minimized the rate deliberately under pressure from management, even though the Bureau's own data and experts concluded that the rate had intensified in the age of automation. The controversy made its way to the AFL-CIO Executive Council, which tried to marshal its influence with friendly congressmen, particularly Rhode Island congressmen John E. Fogarty, labor's closest ally on the House Appropriation Committee, to hold Clague to task. Reuther offered UAW help should Fogarty decide to commission a new study; after all, he wrote, 'the Bureau . . . has so compromised itself on this matter that it no longer can be relied upon to do an objective job'. Almost as soon as Arthur Goldberg assumed his position as Labor Secretary, Weinberg counseled Reuther to take the issue up with him in the hopes that now 'it might be possible to get the BLS to screw up its courage and to state forthrightly the conclusions of its productivity technicians'. 39

Though Weinberg was correct to think that some of Clague's subordinates disagreed with him, the BLS Commissioner stuck to his guns. In spite of earlier remarks to Congressman Fogarty that the productivity rate had increased significantly since the late 1940s, he continued to maintain the contrary in public much to Weinberg's endless consternation. This position allowed Clague to argue that while short-run dislocations were painful, 'over the long run, technological change and increased productivity have contributed to economic growth and expansion of employment opportunities'. If Clague prevailed, then the whole argument that automation was a revolutionary force with a unique potential to displace human beings became nonsensical. Apparently, Clague sniffed the prevailing winds better than Weinberg. His work quickly found its way into Charles Silberman's 1966 broadside Myths of Automation , and both Walter Heller and Paul Samuelson endorsed Clague's position. 40

Indeed, Clague directly influenced policy in the final governmental 'go-round' on automation in 1965, Lyndon Johnson's National Commission on Technology, Automation and Economic Progress. The Commission convened under University of Iowa President Howard R. Bowen at a moment of general optimism among American progressives: Johnson's Great Society was under way; the civil rights gains were solidified; and the promise of substantial, perhaps even radical, reform was greater than at any time in a generation. The UAW had put itself in the forefront

of progressive change and sacrificed both resources and people - Jack Conway, for one, having left the Research Department to work in the administration - to the cause. As they geared up for the Commission's work, Reuther, Weinberg and their colleagues in the UAW and the AFL-CIO hoped that this would not be another futile exercise. They prepared by trying to establish their numbers for productivity growth as the consensus for the group, which they saw as necessary to a defense of Great Society reform. Having conceded that technological change and worker displacement were inevitable, they argued that broad-based programs of education and retraining, unemployment insurance, guaranteed income and social security became all the more important. Moreover, if they were right that productivity was increasing by better than the 3% that Clague proposed, the nation could easily afford ambitious social spending, which would of course have the salutary effect of maintaining robust aggregate demand. 41

Weinberg was thus deeply disappointed when Garth Mangum, Jr, director of the Commission's report, made it clear in the early going where his biases lay. If anything, his position was far more extreme than Clague's. In a June memo to Commission members and affiliated researchers, Mangum set down his premise: 'Technological change has been in no way responsible for the high general levels of unemployment which have plagued the U.S. economy since the end of the Korean War'. Quite against labor's position, Mangum insisted that output growth had not kept up with the increases in the labor force. He flatly declared that technological change always brought growth, higher standards of living and more leisure. It was as though the director of a commission report on the ill effects of automation was ruling out of hand the possibility that there had been any at all. Mangum seemed to assume that his charge was to dispel superstition. After all, 'most things which have been said about technological change and automation are pure mythology. We are faced with an accumulation of social problems', he wrote, and technological change was an easy target. Those problems had many causes, and the fact was that 'the impact of technological change has been almost entirely positive'. Weinberg knew the game was up when the pusillanimous Howard Bowen justified Mangum's attack on the labor position with a lengthy disquisition on how tricky it was to measure productivity. 42

It was no surprise, therefore, that almost point by point, the 1966 report rejected labor's long-standing arguments about the consequences of technological change. In a startling way, it divorced technological change from both unemployment and poverty. 'The basic fact', the report held, 'is that technology eliminates jobs, not work.' Of course, the commission conceded, that was not much solace to the middleaged line worker who was displaced, but on the general level automation was unrelated to structural unemployment. That, the report claimed, was the fate of 'families without breadwinners, . . . those whose productivity is reduced by physical or mental incapacity, . . . [and] people too old to work'. None of these unfortunates were 'victims of technology'. This conclusion counseled for expansionist policies, and the report confidently maintained that jobs for 'those with reasonably attractive skills and no other serious competitive handicaps' would be able to find work. The commission was perfectly content to rest on the gathering strength of the economy in 1964 as tangible proof of its position; the group was confident that Federal fiscal and monetary policy provided all the necessary tools for managing

demand and reducing unemployment. Indeed, they concluded, 'the very groups disproportionately burdened by unemployment -the young and inexperienced, the undereducated, the unskilled, Negroes, production workers - have profited more than disproportionately from the healthy growth of total employment'. 43

While they first threatened to compile an entire dissenting report, the commission's labor members opted for the inclusion of vigorous dissents in footnotes in the final draft. It was wasted effort. Soon after its release, Weinberg reported to Reuther that the Johnson Administration had 'buried the report'. The accelerating economic growth of 1965 made it look as though the expansionist program was working, and in the process, as economist Ben Seligman wrote echoing Weinberg, the purpose of the Commission was to see to it that automation was indeed 'elegantly buried'. 44

For a few more years, Reuther and his colleagues could console themselves that the Great Society reforms were carrying the day, which was, all things considered, more important than quarrels over economic statistics. Because they too believed in stimulating growth through growing consumer demand, they had no quarrel with the expansionist position that was prevailing, even if that position dismissed the issue of automation entirely, but if Reuther was part of a 'burial', he remained deeply worried that he was mourning an important part of organized labor as well. In a long 1964 effort to assess the UAW's position, he acknowledged that even labor's friends were beginning to 'wonder out loud if . . . collective bargaining continues as an operative fact'. They had cause to wonder, given the 'long-range decline in union membership' as well as in union clout, 'due to the increasing technological loss of blue-collar jobs', plant relocations to the South, and the shift to the service economy. Noting the continued job losses in automobile manufacturing, mining, steel, and railroads, he mused over what organized labor still had going for it. His hope was that labor's promise remained alluring and vital: 'We offer not only job security and economic gains, but, more importantly, dignity, self-respect, a voice in one's own destiny, and an effective forum for political and community improvement.' 45 Oddly, these were many of the same things that 10 years before he had hoped might come of automation, and that thought could not have been consoling.

## Acknowledgement

I would like to thank Kevin Boyle, Steven Conn, and Josh Mound for comments on a very different draft of this paper. Christopher Phelps offered good advice on this version, as did Labor History 's anonymous reviewers.

## Notes

- 1. Instrumentation and Automation , 182-383; Love, 'Britons Quit Job', 5.
- 2. Bloch, 'Fifth Biennial Convention', 141; Terborgh, Automation Hysteria. Both Michael Goldfield ( Decline of Organized Labor ) and Daniel Nelson ( Shifting Fortunes ) virtually ignore the role technology played in organized labor's decline. Allan Matusow ( Unraveling of America , 103-4) dispatches automation in a few paragraphs. On the links between technological change and de-industrialization see Bluestone and Harrison, Deindustrialization of America , 117-18. Meatpacking was a good example of the connection between automation and plant relocation. See Purcell, Blue Collar Man , 239-47; Young, 'Armour Experience'; Schultz and Weber, Strategies for the Displaced

- Worker , 1-14. In general see Osborn, Geographical Features , and Hurley, 'Automotive Industry'.
- 3. Lichtenstein, Most Dangerous Man in Detroit , 286-92, 442-3; Noble, Forces of Production , 253.
- 4. 'Automation: A Report to the UAW-CIO Economic and Collective Bargaining Conference, Detroit, Michigan, November 12th and 13th, 1954', 30-1, UAW Special Projects (hereafter cited as UAW-SP), Box 70, File 70:1, Automation Speeches and Articles, 1954-55; Harder, 'Automation', 47-8; Raskin, 'Pattern for Tomorrow', 9; Lawrence, 'Now Large-Scale Assembly', 23; Edsforth, 'Why Automation', 163-4; Lawrence, 'Parsimonious Automation', 21.
- 5. Nat Weinberg, 'Labor in an Automatic Society,' undated, ca 1953, UAW-SP, Box 89, File 89:19, Nat Weinberg Articles and Speeches, 1953-1955.
- 6. Gartman, Auto Slavery , 109-14.
- 7. See, for example, Harder, 'Automation'. It is true that brisk competition for market share erupted as Korean War regulations on material use and consumer credit were lifted in 1953 and 1954 respectively. Thereafter, the Big Three maximized production to meet an unleashed demand and forced mergers among the smaller producers that eliminated America's remaining independent companies. Still, this was competition within the oligopoly. Big Three market share hovered between 80% and 90% through the 1950s, with the secondary producers and foreign makers splitting the difference. I know of no evidence that foreign competition figured into technological decisions in automobiles before 1970. See Abel, 'Auto Industry', 12; New York Times , 'More Competition'; New York Times , 'Auto Men'; New York Times , 'Studebaker Merger,' 2, 26; Weinberg to Reuther, 14 July 1964, UAW-SP, Box 7, File 13, WPR-NW Letters, May-December 1964; and Rae, American Automobile Industry , 119-23. For a discussion of other elements in Ford's decision to automate, see Hounshell, 'Planning and Executing'.
- 8. Meyer, 'The Persistence of Fordism', 87; Gartman, Auto Slavery , 114-24; 'Automation: A Report to the UAW-CIO Economic and Collective Bargaining Conference, November 12th and 13th, 1954', UAW-SP, Box 70, File 70:1, Automation, November 1954, 1-3.
- 9. Jack Conway, 'Labor Looks at Automation', Michigan State University, 13 April 1955, Reuther Papers, Box 45, File 45-13, Automation Committee, 2.
- 10. See Walker and Guest, Man on the Assembly Line ; Guest, 'Work Careers'; Whyte, Men At Work ; Guest, 'Men and Machines'; Chinoy, Automobile Workers , 70-1, 85; Walker, Guest, and Turner, Foreman and the Assembly Line ; Lichtenstein, '''The Man in the Middle'''; Swados, Radical's America , 113, 117. David Halle wisely counsels us not to take worker surveys as gospel, because respondents often have obvious reasons for not being honest with nosy social scientists. Given their critical and consistent nature, I see no reason to distrust the numerous comments concerning assembly-line work. See Halle, America's Working Man , 80-81.
- 11. See Drucker, The Practice of Management , 286-7; John Diebold testimony, Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization , 8; Friedmann, Industrial Society , 186-87; Bell, Work and Its Discontents , 45, 52-3; Brayer, 'Automation and the White-Collar Worker, 285; Shepard, Automation and Alienation , 48-52; quoted in Shils, Automation and Industrial Relations , 212. Contemporary studies by Charles Walker and Floyd Mann and L. Richard Hoffman found some upgrading. Walker found that roughly half of the workers at US Steel's Lorain, Ohio plant experienced some degree of upgrading; Mann and Hoffman found that 85% of their power-plant workers reported having increased responsibilities, while 97% claimed that their new jobs required more skill than in their previous positions. The authors concluded that general job satisfaction improved with new conditions. Perhaps the most systematic study, Bob Blauner's inquiry into conditions in four industries of different technological sophistication, maintained that auto assembly-line work was the most alienating labor, while work in a highlyautomated chemical plant was the most fulfilling. Walker, Toward the Automatic Factory , 60-1, 86-91, 109-10; Mann and Hoffman, Automation and the Worker , 73-4, 19, 24-7, 82-3, 217-20; and Blauner, Alienation and Freedom. James Bright, however, concluded that 'automation had reduced the skill requirements of the operating work force', Bright, 'Does Automation?', 86.

- 12. Faunce, 'Automation and Leisure'; Dubin, 'Industrial Workers' World'; Swados, Radical's America , 102, 97. For a study of the British working class in this vein, see Goldthorpe et al., Affluent Worker . De Grazia, Of Time , 436-7. See also Steigerwald, 'Did the Protestant Ethic Disappear'.
- 13. Soule, What Automation Does , 174; Faunce, 'Automation and Leisure', 304-5; Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd , 318-21, 363; Riesman, 'Some Observations', 419.
- 14. Riesman, 'Leisure and Work', 370, 366, 381.
- 15. Ibid., 367, 371-2.
- 16. Ted Silvey to Nat Weinberg, 27 July 1954, UAW Research Department Papers, (hereafter cited as UAW-RDP) Series II, Box 43, File 'Automation-General, 1954-64'; Nat Weinberg to Ted Silvey, 30 July 1954, ibid. Walter P. Reuther, 'Automation: A Report to the UAW-CIO Economic and Collective Bargaining Conference, Detroit, Michigan, November 12 and 13, 1954', in Reuther Papers, Series III: Box 45-11, 'Automation Committee, 1954-1964', 4. On Wiener see Wiener, Human Use ; Lichtenstein, Most Dangerous Man , 290; Conway and Siegelman, Dark Hero , 244-5.
- 17. Lichenstein, Most Dangerous Man in Detroit , 290-91; Edsforth, 'Why Automation', 175-6; Rowen, Free Enterprisers , 196-97; Cohany, 'The 16th Convention', quoted in Cutler, Labor's Time , 37, 137; Reuther, 'Labor's Stake', in The Challenge of Automation , 53.
- 18. Weinberg to Reuther, 10 June 1957, UAW-SP, Box 6, File 25, WPR-NW letters, 1957.
- 19. 'See It Now', Transcript, 46-47, Reuther Papers, Series III: Box 45-16, File 'Automation Committee,' 1954-1964. Nat Weinberg to Robert Theobald, 7 June 1965,UAW-RDP, Box 43, File 'Automation, General, 1964-68'. See also Weinberg to Reuther, 9 January 1962, Reuther Papers, Box 164, File 164-15, Special Projects Department, 1963; and The Benefits and Problems Incident , 6.
- 20. Diebold, Automation: Its Impact , 3.
- 21. Reuther, 'Statement of Walter P. Reuther', 98. See also Nat Weinberg, 'Practical Approaches to the Problems Raised by Automation', UAW-RDP, Box 43, File 'Automation-General', 1956-57, 1.
- 22. See note 21 above, Weinberg, 'Practical Approaches', 3.
- 23. 'Automation: A Report to the UAW-CIO Economic and Collective Bargaining Conference, Detroit, MI., November 12 &amp; 13, 1954', 11-12, 27, Reuther Papers, Series III: Box 45-11, File Automation Committee, 1954-1964; see note 9, Conway, 'Labor Looks at Automation,' 3; Weinberg to Reuther, 11 April 1955, Reuther Papers, Series III: Box 286, File 10, Committee on Automation, 1954-5; Lichtenstein, Most Dangerous Man , 284-6.
- 24. Lichtenstein, Most Dangerous Man , 286; Weinberg to Reuther, 25 February 1955, UAW-SP, Box 6, File 23, WPR-NW letters, 1955; 'Statement of Walter P. Reuther, President of the United Autoworkers and the Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO, Before the Subcommittee on Unemployment and the Impact of Automation, Education and Labor Committee of the House of Representatives', UAW-RDP, Box 43, File: Automation, Elmer G. Holland, 34-35. On the Armour Plan, see Young, 'Armour Experience', 144-58; Schultz and Weber, Strategies for the Displaced Worker , 1-14.
- 25. Reuther, 'Statement of Walter P. Reuther', 103; 'Preliminary Report of the UAW-CIO Committee on Automation', Reuther Papers, Series III: Box 45, File 10, Automation Committee, 2-4, 5; see also Bannon and Samp, 'Impact of Automation', 612-15.
- 26. Weinberg to Reuther, 22 February 1962, 15 March 1962, UAW-SP, Box 84, File 84-13, Blue Collar-White, Interoffice Memos, 1962; Weinberg to Reuther, 15 March 1962, ibid.; Walter Reuther to John F. Dykstra, 23 March 1962, UAW-SP, Box 84, File 84-11, Blue Collar-White, Automobiles; Weinberg to Reuther, 5 May 1964, UAW-SP, Box 7, File 13, WPR-NW letters, May-December 1964.
- 27. Hoos, Automation in the Office ; Blauner, Alienation and Freedom ; Faunce, 'Automation in the Automobile Industry', 402-5.
- 28. 'See It Now', 9; Reuther quoted in O'Donnell, 'The UAW's 19th Constitutional Convention', 654; see also Walter Reuther to Dwight Eisenhower, 19 February 1958, UAW-SP, Box 6, File 26, WPR-NW letters, 1958.
- 29. See note 21 above, Weinberg, 'Practical Approaches', 5-6.

- 30. Groom, 'A Review of American', 1; Matusow, Unraveling of America , 42-57; Rowen, Free Enterprisers , 253-9.
- 31. 'Statement By Stanley H. Ruttenberg, AFL-CIO Research Director Before the Subcomittee on Unemployment and the Impact of Automation, March 29, 1961', UAW-SP, Box 70, File 70-1, Automation, 1954-65; Seligman, Most Notorious Victory , 209-10; Kolko, 'Nobody Wants', 186-91; Stern, 'A Union View', 422-4; Theobold, 'Can We Survive', 392; Kahn, 'Automation and Employment', 796-805; Clague and Greenberg, 'Employment', 114-31; Hodgson, 'Automation', 5-7; Shils, Automation and Industrial Relations , 136-42; Snyder, 'Automation and Unemployment', 4-18; Goldberg, 'Challenge of Industrial', 36; Seidman, 'The Union Agenda', 636.
- 32. Meredith, 'Long-term Unemployment', 601.
- 33. Goldstein, 'Projections of the Labor Force', 15-32; Young, 'Intermingled Revolutions', 692-4; Seligman, 'Automation and the State', 50; Buckingham, 'Great Employment', 50; Cohany, 'Membership of American', 1299. On the employment of high-school dropouts, see Shiffman, 'Employment of High. 1961', 502-16; Shiffman, 'Employment of High. 1962', 772-9; Bogan, 'Employment of High. 1964', 637-49.
- 34. New York Times , 'Text of the President's', 10.
- 35. Stebenne, Arthur J. Goldberg , 255-67; Raskin, 'Trouble Shooter,' 10, 17-21; Nossiter, 'Administration Investing', A5; Weinberg to Reuther, 31 May 1961, Research Department Papers, Series II, Box 41, 'Automation-General, 1954-1964'; Raskin, 'White House', 1.
- 36. The Benefits and Problems Incident , 2-5; Pomfret, 'First Projects', 1, 67; Goldberg, 'Proposed Bill', 557-62; Seligman, 'Automation and the State', 53.
- 37. Weinberg to Reuther, 1 August 1960, UAW-SP, Box 7, File 3, WPR NW letters, May-August 1960; Weinberg to Reuther, 3 April 1965, UAW-SP, Box 55, File 55-12, National Commission on Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress.
- 38. Weinberg to Reuther, 3 March 1959, UAW-SP, Box 6, File 27, WPR-NW letters, 1959; Weinberg to Reuther, 22 January 1960, UAW-SP, Box 7, File 2, WPR-NW letters, January-April 1960.
- 39. See Trends in Output , 4-7; Nat Weinberg Memo, 'Clague's Reply to Congressmen Fogarty', 17 March 1960, UAW-SP, Box 7, File 2, WPR-NW letters, January-April 1960; Ewan Clague to John E. Fogarty, 10 February 1960, ibid.; Walter Reuther to John E. Fogarty, 16 March 1960, ibid.; Weinberg to Reuther, 15 March 1961, UAW-SP, Box 7, File 5, WPR-NW letters, January-June 1961.
- 40. Clague and Greenberg, 'Technological Change', 742; Clague, 'Effects of Technological', 29-38; Weinberg to Reuther, 20 January 1964, Reuther Papers, Box 390, File 1, LaborMgt Policy, 2; Silberman, Myths of Automation , 130-2; Heller, 'The Case for Aggregate Demand', 142-3; Rowen, Free Enterprisers , 254-5.
- 41. Weinberg to Reuther, 13 April 1965, UAW-SP, Box 55, File 55-12, National Commission on Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress; Weinberg Memo, 'Several Issues that the Commission Should Examine', UAW-SP, Box 71, File 71-18, Automation Commission, AFL-CIO Correspondence, 1965, 3-4; Woodrow Ginsberg to Walter Reuther, 30 November 1965, ibid. See the various position paper drafts in UAW-SP, Box 71, File 71-20, Automation Commission, draft reports, 1965-66.
- 42. Garth Mangum, Jr, 'Memorandum to Commission Members', 14 June 1965, UAW-SP, Box 55, File 55-12, National Commission on Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress, 1965-66; Howard R. Bowen, memo to Commission members, 15 November 1965, UAW-SP, Box 71, File 71-19, Automation Commission, 1965-66.
- 43. Technology and the American Economy , 9, 38, 34, 6-7. See also Holland, 'Long-term Unemployment', 1069-76.
- 44. Weinberg to Reuther, 30 June 1966, UAW-SP, Box 55, File 55-17, Memos, Nat to WPR, 1965-66; Seligman, 'Automation and the State', 51. See also Bell, 'Government by Commission,' 4-5.
- 45. Reuther, 'United Automobile Workers', 65-68.

## Notes on contributor

David Steigerwald is an associate professor in modern American history at The Ohio State University. He is the author of three books and co-author of one. He is finishing a study on affluence and alienation in post-WWII thought, which will appear as Lost in the Land of Plenty .

## References

Abel, Elie. 'Auto Industry Sees a Decline; Split on When and How Fast'. New York Times , 20 July 1953, 1, 12.

- New York Times . 'Auto Men Expect Further Mergers'. New York Times , 14 February 1954, F6.

Bannon, Ken, and Nelson Samp. 'Impact of Automation on Ford-UAW Relationships'. Monthly Labor Review 81 (June 1958): 612-5.

Bell, Daniel. Work and Its Discontents: The Cult of Efficiency in the United States. New York: League for Industrial Democracy, 1970.

Bell, Daniel. 'Government by Commission'. Public Interest 3 (Spring 1966): 3-9.

The Benefits and Problems Incident to Automation and Other Technological Advances: The Report of the President's Labor-Management Committee . Washington, DC: GPO, 1962.

Blauner, Bob. Alienation and Freedom: The Factory Worker and His Industry . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964.

Bloch, Joseph W. 'The Fifth Biennial Convention of the AFL-CIO'. Monthly Labor Review 87 (February 1964): 140-2.

Bluestone, Barry, and Bennett Harrison. The Deindustrialization of America: Plant Closings, Community Abandonment, and the Dismantling of Basic Industry . New York: Basic Books, 1982.

Bogan, Forrest A. 'Employment of High School Graduates and Dropouts in 1964'. Monthly Labor Review 88 (June 1965): 637-49.

Brayer, Herbert O. 'Automation and the White-Collar Worker: Fact vs. Fantasy'. Management Review 45 (April 1956): 284-7.

Bright, James D. 'Does Automation Raise Skill Requirements?' Harvard Business Review 36 (July/August 1958): 85-98.

Buckingham, Walter. 'The Great Employment Controversy'. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 340 (March 1962): 46-52.

The Challenge of Automation: Papers Delivered at the National Conference on Automation . Washington, DC: Public Affairs Press, 1955.

Chinoy, Ely. Automobile Workers and the American Dream . Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1955.

Cohany, Harry P. 'The 16th Convention of the United Auto Workers'. Monthly Labor Review 80 (June 1957): 697-701.

Cohany, Harry P. 'Membership of American Trade Unions, 1960'. Monthly Labor Review 84 (December 1961): 1299-308.

Conway, Flo, and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In Search of Norbert Wiener, Father of Cybernetics . New York: Basic Books, 2005.

Clague, Ewen, and Leon Greenberg. 'Technological Change and Employment'. Monthly Labor Review 85 (July 1962): 742-6.

Clague, Ewen, and Leon Greenberg. 'Employment'. In Automation and Technological Change , ed. John T. Dunlop, 114-31. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962.

Clague, Ewen. 'Effects of Technological Change on Occupational Employment Patterns in the United States'. In Manpower Implications of Automation: Papers Presented by the U.S. Department of Labor at the O.E.C.D. North American Regional Conference , 29-38. Washington, DC: GPO, 1964.

Cutler, Jonathon. Labor's Time: Shorter Hours, the UAW, and the Struggle for American Unionism . Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2004.

De Grazia, Sebastian. Of Time, Work, and Leisure . New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1962.

Diebold, John. Automation: Its Impact on Business and Labor. Washington, DC: National Planning Association, 1959.

Drucker, Peter.

The Practice of Management

.

New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1954.

Dubin, Robert. 'Industrial Workers' World'. In Mass Leisure , ed. Eric Larrabee and Rolf Meyerson, 215-28. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1958.

Edsforth, Ronald. 'Why Automation Didn't Shorten the Work Week: The Politics of Work Time in the Automobile Industry'. In Autowork , ed. Robert Asher and Ronald Edsforth, 155-80. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1995.

Friedmann, Georges. Industrial Society : The Emergence of the Human Problems of Automation . ed. Harold L. Sheppard. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1955.

Faunce, William. 'Automation in the Automobile Industry: Some Consequences for In-Plant Social Structure'. American Sociological Review 23 (August 1958): 401-7.

Faunce, William. 'Automation and Leisure'. In Automation and Society , ed. Howard Boone Jacobson and Joseph S. Roucek, 297-309. New York: Philosophical Library, 1959.

Gartman, David. Auto Slavery: The Labor Process in the American Automobile Industry, 1987-1950 . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986.

Goldberg, Arthur J. 'Challenge of Industrial Revolution II'. New York Times Sunday Magazine 2 April 1961, 11, 36-37.

Goldberg, Arthur J. 'Proposed Bill for Manpower Development and Training Act'. Labor Law Journal 12 (June 1961): 557-63.

Goldfield, Michael. The Decline of Organized Labor in the United States . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Goldstein, Harold. 'Projections of the Labor Force of the United States'. In The Manpower Revolution: Its Policy Consequences. Excerpts from Senate Hearings Before the Clark Subcommittee , ed. Garth L. Magnum. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1965.

Goldthorpe, John H., Frank Bechhofer, David Lockwood and Jennifer Platt. The Affluent Worker in the Class Structure . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969.

Groom, Phyllis. 'A Review of American Labor in 1961'. Monthly Labor Review 85 (January 1962): 1-8.

Guest, Robert H. 'An Assembly-line Worker Looks at His Job'. In Modern Technology and Civilization: An Introduction to Human Problems in the Machine Age , ed. Charles R. Walker and Adelaide G. Walker, 97-103. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.

Guest, Robert H. 'Men and Machines', in Charles R. Walker and Adelaide G. Walker, eds., Modern Technology and Civilization . New York: McGraw Hill, 1962.

Guest, Robert H. 'Work Careers and Aspirations of Automobile Workers'. American Sociological Review 19 (April 1954): 153-63.

Halle, David. America's Working Man: Work, Homes, and Politics Among Blue-Collar Property Owners . Chicago: University of Chicago Pres, 1984.

Harder, Del S. 'Automation: A Modern Industrial Development'. Automation 1 (August 1954): 46-54.

Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report, Congress of the United States, 84th Congress . Washington, DC: GPO, 1955.

Heller, Walter. 'The Case for Aggregate Demand'. In The Manpower Revolution: Its Policy Consequences. Excerpts from Senate Hearings Before the Clark Subcommittee , ed. Garth L. Magnum. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1965.

Hodgson, James D. 'Automation-A Study in Promise, Problems, and Polemics'. Management of Personnel Quarterly 2 (Autumn 1963): 5-7.

Holland, Susan S. 'Long-term Unemployment in the 1960s'. Monthly Labor Review 88 (September 1965): 1069-76.

Hoos, Ida. Automation in the Office . Washington, DC: Public Affairs Press, 1961.

Hounshell, David A. 'Planning and Executing 'Automation' at Ford Motor Company, 1945-65: The Cleveland Engine Plant and Its Consequences'. In Fordism Transformed: The Development of Production Methods in the Automobile Industry , ed. Haruhito Shiomi and Kazuo Wada, 49-86. New York: Oxford University Press; 1995.

Hurley, Neil P. 'The Automotive Industry: A Study in Industrial Location'. Land Economics 35 (February 1959): 1-14.

Instrumentation and Automation: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization of the Joint Economic Committee, 84th Congress . Washington, DC: GPO, 1957.

Kahn, Herbert L. 'Automation and Employment'. Labor Law Journal 10 (November 1959): 796-805.

Kolko, Gabriel. 'Nobody Wants to Sound Defeatist-Publicly'. In Machines and the Man: A Sourcebook on Automation , ed. Robert P. Weeks, 186-91. New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts, 1961.

Lawrence, Floyd G. 'Parsimonious Automation'. Automation 2 (June 1955): 20-21.

Lawrence, Floyd G. 'Now Large-Scale Assembly'. Automation 2 (October 1955): 23.

Lichtenstein, Nelson. The Most Dangerous Man in Detroit: Walter Reuther and the Fate of American Labor . New York: Basic Books, 1995.

Lichtenstein, Nelson. '''The Man in the Middle'': A Social History of Automobile Industry Foreman'. In On the Line: Essays in the History of Auto Work , ed. Nelson Lichtenstein and Stephen Meyer, 153-89. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1989.

Love, Kennett. 'Britons Quit Job Over Automation'. New York Times , 3 May 1956.

Mann, Floyd C. and L. Richard Hoffman Automation and the Worker: A Study of Social Change in Power Plants . New York: Holt, 1960.

Matusow, Allan. The Unraveling of America: A History of Liberalism in the 1960s . New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1984.

Meredith, Jane L. 'Long-term Unemployment in the United States'. Monthly Labor Review 84 (June 1961): 601-10.

Meyer, Stephan. 'The Persistence of Fordism: Workers and Technology in the American Automobile Industry, 1900-1960'. In One the Line: Essays in the History of Auto Work , ed. Nelson Lichtenstein and Stephen Meyer, 73-99. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1989.

New York Times . 'More Competition in Auto Sales Seen'. New York Times , 4 October 1953, F7.

Nelson, Daniel. Shifting Fortunes: The Rise and Decline of American Labor From the 1820s to the Present . Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1997.

Noble, David F. Forces of Production: A Social History of Industrial Automation . New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.

Nossiter, Bernard. 'Administration Investing High Hopes in New Labor-Management Group'. Washington Post , 12 February 1961.

O'Donnell, L.A. 'The UAW's 19th Constitutional Convention'. Monthly Labor Review 87 (June 1964): 654-6.

Osborn, David G. Geographical Features of the Automation of Industry . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1953.

Purcell, Theodore V. Blue Collar Man: Patterns of Dual Allegiance in Industry . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1960.

Pomfret, John D. 'First Projects to Retrain Unemployed Approved'. New York Times , 9 September 1962.

Rae, John B. The American Automobile Industry . Boston, MA: Twayne, 1984.

Raskin, A.H. 'Pattern for Tomorrow's Industry? New York Times Sunday Magazine , 18 December 1955.

Raskin, A.H. 'Trouble Shooter on the New Frontier'. New York Times Sunday Magazine , 12 February 1961.

Raskin, A.H. 'White House Seeks Cure for Unemployment Blight'. New York Times , 19 April 1961.

Reuther, Walter P. (WPR) Walter P. Reuther Papers. United Auto Workers President's Office, Walter P. Reuther Library, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.

Reuther, Walter P. 'Statement of Walter P. Reuther, President, Congress of Industrial Organizations'. In Automation and Technological Change: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report, Congress of the United States , 97-149. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1955.

Reuther, Walter P. 'The United Automobile Workers: Past, Present, and Future'. Virginia Law Review 50 (January 1964): 58-103.

Riesman, Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer. The Lonely Crowd: A Study in the Changing American Character . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950.

Riesman, Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer. 'Leisure and Work in Post-Industrial Society'. In Mass Leisure , ed. Eric Larrabee and Rolf Meyerson, 363-85. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1958.

Riesman, Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer. 'Some Observations on Changes in Leisure Attitudes'. Antioch Review 12 (Winter 1952): 417-36.

Rowen, Hobart. The Free Enterprisers: Kennedy, Johnson and the Business Establishment . New York: Putnam &amp; Sons, 1964.

Schultz, George P. and Arnold R. Weber Strategies for the Displaced Worker: Confronting Economic Change . New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1966.

Seidman, Joel. 'The Union Agenda for Security'. Monthly Labor Review 86 (June 1963): 636-44.

Seligman, Ben. 'Automation and the State'. Commentary 37 (June 1964), 49-54.

Seligman, Ben. Most Notorious Victory: Man in an Age of Automation. New York: Free Press, 1966.

Shepard, Jon M. Automation and Alienation: A Study of Office and Factory Workers . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971.

Shiffman, Jacob. 'Employment of High School Graduates and Dropouts in 1961'. Monthly Labor Review 85 (May 1962): 502-16.

Shiffman, Jacob. 'Employment of High School Graduates and Dropouts in 1962'. Monthly Labor Review 86 (July 1963): 772-9.

Shils, Edward. Automation and Industrial Relations . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1963.

Silberman, Charles. Myths of Automation . New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1966.

Snyder, John I., Jr. 'Automation and Unemployment: Management's Quiet Crisis'. Management Review 52 (November 1963): 4-18.

Soule, George. What Automation Does to Human Beings . London: Sidgwick &amp; Jackson, 1956. Stebenne, David. Arthur J. Goldberg: New Deal Liberal . New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Steigerwald, David. 'Did the Protestant Ethic Disappear: The Virtue of Thrift on the Cusp of Affluence'. Enterprise and Society 9 (December 2008): 788-815.

Stern, James. 'A Union View of Automation'. Antioch Review 16 (December 1956): 419-34. New York Times . 'Studebaker Merger With Packard Voted'. New York Times , 18 August 1954, 1, 26.

Swados, Harvey. A Radical's America . Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1962.

Technology and the American Economy: The Report of the National Commission on Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress . Washington, DC: GPO, 1966.

Terborgh, George. The Automation Hysteria . New York: Norton, 1966.

New York Times . 'Text of the President's Message to Congress on Economic Recovery and Growth'. New York Times , 3 February 1961.

Theobold, Robert. 'Can We Survive Abundance'. Nation 196 (11 May 1963): 392.

Trends in Output Per Man-Hour in the Private Economy . Washington, DC: GPO, 1959.

United Auto Workers Research Department Papers. Walter P. Reuther Library, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.

United Auto Workers Research Department. Special Projects Collection, Walter P. Reuther Library, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.

Walker, Charles R. Toward the Automatic Factory: A Case Study of Men and Machines . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1957.

Walker Charles R., and Robert H. Guest. The Man on the Assembly Line. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1952.

Walker Charles R., Robert H. Guest, and Arthur N. Turner. The Foreman on the Assembly Line. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1956.

Wiener, Norbert. Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society . Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin, 1950.

Whyte, William Foote. Men At Work . Homewood, IL: R.D. Irwin, 1959.

Young, Edwin. 'The Armour Experience'. In Adjusting to Technological Change , ed. Gerald G. Somers, Edward L. Cushman, and Nat Wienberg, 144-58. New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1963.

Young, Whitney Jr. M., 'The Intermingled Revolutions: The Negro and Automation'. Vital Speeches of the Day 30 (1 September 1964): 692-4.