<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Explorations in Economic History

j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eeh

<!-- image -->

## Were British cotton entrepreneurs technologically backward? Firm-level evidence on the adoption of ring spinning

## Federico Ciliberto

Department of Economics, University of Virginia, United States

## a r t i c l e i n f o

## a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 12 August 2009 Available online 12 June 2010

JEL classi /uniFB01 cation:

N63

L22

L67

Keywords: Ring spinning Technology adoption Cotton industry Lancashire Vertical integration Specialization

I study the slow adoption of ring spinning in Great Britain's cotton industry at the end of the 19th century, which has been used as evidence of British entrepreneurs' declining ef /uniFB01 ciency and conservatism (Musson, 1959; Aldcroft, 1964; Lazonick, 1981, 1981b). To this purpose I use /uniFB01 rm-level data from all of Lancashire's cotton /uniFB01 rms over several years. The data are from Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory for the years 1885, 1886 -1887, 1890, 1894, 1902, and 1910.

First, I show that the vertical organization of the industry, with its /uniFB01 rms specializing in spinning or weaving, did not act as an impediment to the adoption of the ring spinning technology, as was argued by Lazonick. In particular, I show the following: i) non-integrated /uniFB01 rms were the /uniFB01 rst to adopt rings in Great Britain; ii) the large majority of /uniFB01 rms that adopted rings were incumbents; iii) vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms that were spinning only either twist or weft yarn were still in existence in 1910; and iv) only a negligible number of /uniFB01 rms changed their organizational structure upon adopting ring spinning. I also show that a large fraction of /uniFB01 rms installed very small numbers of ring spindles upon the adoption of ring spinning, suggesting that /uniFB01 rms were slowly adopting ring spindles to replace old mule spindles rather than transitioning over to ring spinning at a single point in time.

Then, I show that the rate at which vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms adopted rings suddenly accelerated after 1902. I interpret this as evidence that British entrepreneurs were fully aware of the technological complementarities between rings and automatic looms. These complementarities could only be fully exploited by vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

For decades, historians have been concerned with explaining the decline of Great Britain as the economic world leader after 1870. By the end of the 1890s, Britain had lost the industrial leadership of the world to Germany and the United States (McCloskey and Sandberg, 1971). In an in /uniFB02 uential paper, Aldcroft (1964) argued that ' Britain's poor economic performance can be attributed largely to the failure of the British entrepreneur to respond to the challenge of changed condition. [...] The failure to adopt new techniques, that is new machinery and other cost-reducing innovations [...] was one of the chief reasons [...] for the decline in the rate of growth of the British economy. ' 1

This paper investigates whether the decline of Great Britain can be explained, at least in part, by the ineptitude of its entrepreneurs, as was argued by Aldcroft. To address this question, I look at one industrial case that has been at the centre of a highly charged and often heated exchange spread out over a number of rounds and spanning several decades: the slow adoption

by the British entrepreneurs of ring spinning in yarn production. The main reason why the adoption of ring spinning has received so much attention is because the cotton industry was the most important export industry in Britain throughout the 19th century.

Since the mid 1880s, the new technique of ring spinning had become economically viable in yarn production. 2 The production of yarn was faster with ring spinning than with mule spinning. Further, labor costs were lower. Ring spinning was more ef /uniFB01 cient than mule spinning: per unit of time, ring spinning resulted in higher production at a lower labor cost. If British entrepreneurs had been pro /uniFB01 t maximizers, the indictment reads, they should have started adopting ring spinning as soon as the early 1880s, when it became economically viable. Until 1910, however, mule spinning continued to be heavily preferred to ring spinning. For this reason, the slow adoption of ring spinning has been used as evidence of British entrepreneurs' declining ef /uniFB01 ciency and conservatism (Musson, 1959).

Sandberg (1969) challenged the interpretation of the slow adoption of ring spinning as evidence of the ineptitude of the British entrepreneurs. He calculated the cost and bene /uniFB01 ts of mule versus ring spinning, and concluded that the choice of production technique was rational. Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms were adopting rings for the production of the coarser types of cotton yarn for which the ring was superior to the mule.

Lazonick (1981a,b) revived the hypothesis that Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms were managed by inept entrepreneurs. Lazonick con /uniFB01 rmed Sandberg's conclusions that Lancashire ' businessmen performed admirably as neoclassical managers, ' but he also advanced the hypothesis that they ' failed as entrepreneurs. ' 3 Lazonick showed that entrepreneurial failure was systematic across the cotton industry, and did not involve only ' scattered cases of entrepreneurial success or failure. ' 4 The central tenet of Lazonick's argument was the following. In the last quarter of the 19th century, most of the Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms were either spinning cotton or weaving yarn. Some vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms were both spinning and weaving on the same site. Lazonick argued that the cost of shipping ring yarn was signi /uniFB01 cantly higher for non-integrated /uniFB01 rms than it was for integrated /uniFB01 rms, while the difference was inconsequential for mule yarn. Rings spun the yarn on a heavy wooden bobbin that needed to be rewound, while mules spun yarn on small and light packages ready to be woven. For some types of yarn, the difference in the transportation costs was so large that a non-integrated /uniFB01 rm would have never found it pro /uniFB01 table to adopt ring spinning. Lancashire businessmen should then have vertically integrated but did not, failing to ' recognize that managers from time to time (as innovating entrepreneurs), overcome ' given ' constraints and on a more regular basis (as supervisors of the enterprise) alter ' given ' constraints. ' 5 The constraint that Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms did not overcome was the vertical organization of cotton production. 6

Saxonhouse and Wright (1984) challenged Lazonick's claim that it was because of the vertical organization of the industry that the Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms did not adopt rings. First, they used data from the records of British textile machinery companies to show that the Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms did not adopt an innovation (paper tubes) that would have reduced the transportation costs associated with ring spinning. 7 They inferred that transportation costs had to be lower than the amount that Lazonick computed, because otherwise the British /uniFB01 rms would have adopted the innovation. 8 Second, they used the same records of British textile machinery companies to develop a cross-country comparison between Britain, New England, and Japan. 9 On one hand, they pointed out that New England had a vertically integrated cotton industry but never attained international competitiveness. 10 On the other hand, they highlighted the case of the Japanese cotton industry, which rapidly captured the world markets in the 1920s and 1930s while switching from mules to rings, but never wove more than 30% of its yarn on a vertically integrated basis. 11 Using this stark contrast between the British, Japanese and New England experiences, Saxonhouse and Wright concluded that vertical specialization was not, per se , an obstacle to ring adoption.

- 6 See Lazonick, pp. 396 -397 (1984, pp. 396 -397) for more on this. Temin (1990, page 906) has argued that the ease of access to capital made the formation of integrated concerns easier in North America. Following Temin's argument, this is equivalent to saying that if in Lancashire there had been easy access to capital, cotton /uniFB01 rms would have chosen vertical integration over specialization. However, information at the /uniFB01 rm-level shows that many /uniFB01 rms were sharing power, plants, and possibly power-looms. As Gatrell (1977, page 105) wrote, credit was available to all producers in the 1820s and 1830s: ' by 1835, it was claimed that ' most new ' /uniFB01 rms were being set up on borrowings of up to two-thirds of the value of buildings and machinery combined. '
- 7 Saxonhouse and Wright use the data from the records of British textile machinery companies to also con /uniFB01 rm one of Lazonick's /uniFB01 nding, which is that British cotton spinners maintained their commitment to the mule in new installations until World War I.
- 8 In his reply to Saxonhouse and Wright, Lazonick (1987) made a useful distinction between twist and weft yarns, which Saxonhouse and Wright essentially accepted: paper tubes would have ensured lower transportation costs only for twist (warp) yarn, not for weft yarn. Thus, Saxonhouse and Wright's main point remained valid as far as warp yarn was concerned: Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms did not adopt it to as great an extent as they should have if transportation costs were as important as Lazonick had claimed in his previous work.
- 9 Saxonhouse and Wright (2010) further investigate the evolution of ring spinning at global, national and /uniFB01 rm levels, and track adoption decisions in a large number of countries over a span of more than /uniFB01 fty years. The result of their investigation is a case study in global competition between contending technological paradigms.
- 10 See Leunig (2003) for an analysis of productivity in the Lancashire and New England cotton spinning industries at the beginning of the 20th century.
- 11 In a paper co-written with Mass (Mass and Lazonick, 1990), Lazonick addressed this second point made by Saxonhouse and Wright. Lazonick and Mass claimed that the explanation of Japan's success was in its ' planned co-ordination, ' which dominated the ' market co-ordination ' of the Lancashire industry. That is, spinning-only /uniFB01 rms as well as merchants (or trading companies) co-ordinated the vertical structure of the industry so that even though they never wove more than 30% of its yarn (mostly for the export trade) on a vertically integrated basis, it still acted as if it was fully vertically integrated. The crucial question here is, how do we measure the extent of vertical co-ordination? More speci /uniFB01 cally, how can we determine in some quanti /uniFB01 able fashion whether the Japanese cotton industry was more vertically ' co-ordinated ' than the British one? In contrast to the original article by Lazonick (1984), Mass and Lazonick (1990) do not provide a sharp and de /uniFB01 nitive testable hypothesis, just an interesting perspective on the differences between the Japanese and the British cotton industries at the beginning of the 20th century. For more on this, and for a more detailed discussion of the role of merchants as co-ordinating agents in the Lancashire cotton industry, see Broadberry and Marrison (2002) and Farnie (2004).

In recent work, Leunig (1996, 2001) further investigated the differences in transportation costs associated with ring and mule spinning. Leunig broke down the distribution of spinners and weavers in Lancashire and assessed how much yarn was spun and woven in each district. He constructed proxies for yarn output and weaving capacity, and identi /uniFB01 ed those districts where weaving capacity exceeded total spinning output. He called these the ' co-located ' districts. All spinners in a ' co-located ' district could have sold all of their yarn to weavers within their districts. The critical point made by Leunig is that non-integrated /uniFB01 rms in ' co-located ' districts could escape the problem of transport costs. Hence, by contrasting the ring adoption patterns of integrated and nonintegrated /uniFB01 rms in co-located districts, Leunig tested whether the vertical organization of a /uniFB01 rm acted as a constraint in the adoption of rings. He found that rings were the clear majority choice for both vertically integrated and co-located /uniFB01 rms, whereas mules were the clear majority choice for vertically isolated /uniFB01 rms. Leunig also concluded that vertical specialization was not per se an obstacle to ring adoption.

A fundamental unifying feature of the works by Sandberg, Lazonick, Saxonhouse and Wright, and Leunig is that they all use aggregate data to investigate what is fundamentally a /uniFB01 rm-level issue, the adoption of ring spinning. To be able to infer something about /uniFB01 rm behavior from aggregate data, these authors used very clever arguments. Here, I take a different approach. Instead of relying on some very sophisticated deductive arguments, I let the data speak.

The main contribution of this paper is to use /uniFB01 rm-level data from the entire population of Lancashire cotton /uniFB01 rms over several years to investigate the organizational and technological choices of the cotton /uniFB01 rms in that county. The data are from Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory for 1885, 1887, 1890, 1894, 1902, and 1910. 12 In practice, I collected and organized data for thousands of /uniFB01 rms, and classi /uniFB01 ed them as spinner-only, weaver-only, or vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms. This makes it possible to directly test arguments that Lazonick used to claim that British entrepreneurs failed as entrepreneurs. I also match information from Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directories with maps of Preston and Blackburn extracted from the Ordnance Survey, 1891 -92. This allows me to check Leunig's theory of co-location using /uniFB01 rm-level data.

First, I show that the vertical organization of the industry, with its /uniFB01 rms specializing in spinning or weaving, did not act as an impediment to the adoption of the ring spinning technology, as was argued by Lazonick. In particular, I show the following: i) nonintegrated /uniFB01 rms were the /uniFB01 rst to adopt rings in Great Britain; ii) the large majority of /uniFB01 rms that adopted rings were incumbents; iii) vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms that were spinning-only either twist or weft yarn were still in existence in 1910; and iv) only a negligible number of /uniFB01 rms changed their organizational structure upon adopting ring spinning. I also show that a large proportion of /uniFB01 rms installed very small numbers of ring spindles upon the adoption of ring spinning, suggesting that /uniFB01 rms were slowly adopting ring spindles to replace old mule spindles rather than transitioning over to ring spinning at a single point in time.

Then, I show that the rate at which vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms adopted rings suddenly accelerated after 1902. This is a novel and striking /uniFB01 nding that had not been uncovered until now. I interpret this /uniFB01 nding as evidence that British entrepreneurs were fully aware of the technological complementarities between rings and automatic looms. These complementarities could only be fully exploited by vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms.

The paper is organized as follows. I provide a description of the cotton manufacturing process in Section 2. The new dataset is brie /uniFB02 y described in Section 3. Section 4 investigates how the deductive arguments used by Sandberg, Lazonick, Saxonhouse and Wright, and Leunig fare when /uniFB01 rm-level data is used. Section 5 proposes an explanation for why vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms started adopting rings only after 1902. Section 6 concludes.

## 2. A brief introduction to the production of cotton

## 2.1. Cotton spinning and weaving

The production of cotton can be summarized in four successive steps: cleaning the raw cotton 13 ; ' spinning , or transforming ' the cleaned raw cotton into yarn; ' weaving ' the yarn into cotton cloth; and the /uniFB01 nishing operations, such as ' bleaching , ' ' dyeing ' and ' printing . In this paper I focus on the spinning and weaving processes. ' 14 The basic function of the spinning process is to bind the /uniFB01 laments together into one strand by means of twisting it, and ensure that the resulting yarn resists the strain which it will have to undergo when woven. After being twisted, the yarn is wound into a package to be shipped to weavers. These two subprocesses, twisting and winding, can either be done continuously (using rings) or intermittently (using mules). Weaving consists of combining two sets of threads, one of which is immobile (the warp or twist), and the other which moves normally to the /uniFB01 rst and /uniFB01 lls it (the weft). 15

15 The result of spinning was either warp or weft yarn. The /uniFB01 rst had to be stronger than the second, since it would serve as the frame of the cloth, while the weft would be used to /uniFB01 ll the twist to form the cloth. Weft would use cotton that is 7% shorter than that needed for ring warp (Leunig, 1996).

## 2.2. Technological progress

There are three technological periods for weaving. First, between 1800 and 1830, the hand-loom was used to produce all cloths. Often, spinning was done in factories, while weaving was either outsourced to households, or done in sheds attached to the factory. By 1830, the power-loom was perfected and could be used to weave coarse and medium cloths. Cloths that used yarn of counts of up to 60 could be woven in 1841 with power-looms. Between 1850 and the 1880s, the power-loom was extended to the production of /uniFB01 ne cloth. In 1894 the automatic loom was invented in the US, but it was adopted very slowly in Britain.

There are two technological periods in spinning. The /uniFB01 rst period goes from 1820 to the early 1880s. In these years, the selfacting mule was used by all spinners. Then in the early 1880s, the ring frame was perfected for spinning coarse and medium cloths and was slowly adopted by British entrepreneurs.

## 2.3. Fineness

Cotton yarn is normally classi /uniFB01 ed as coarse, medium, or /uniFB01 ne. The unit of measures of /uniFB01 neness is the ' hank . A hank of cotton ' yarn or twist always measures 840 yd. If the count of 1 is reported, this means that 1 hank of cotton yarn weighs 1 lb. If the count of 40 is reported, this means that 40 hanks of cotton weigh 1 lb. 16 The more hanks that are needed to make 1 lb, the /uniFB01 ner the yarn is. Thus, a count of 120 means that the yarn is very /uniFB01 ne, a count of 40 means that the yarn is of medium /uniFB01 neness, and a count of 2 means that the yarn is very coarse.

## 2.4. Ring versus mule spinning

Ring spinning subjected cotton to more strain: for any given count, mule spinning could use raw cotton of lesser quality relative to what ring spinning could use. Ring spinning required a longer cotton staple and, since the price of cotton increased with length, the raw input was potentially more costly under ring spinning. Leunig calculates the cost differentials of raw cotton between ring and mule spinning. 17 He shows convincingly that the premium started slightly in the range of counts 20 to 30 and increased with count spun. 18

Rings required unskilled or semiskilled female labor, while mule spinning used highly skilled male labor. Further, ring spinning was faster. In the same amount of time, one ring spindle could produce 1.45 times more than one mule spindle. 19 Sandberg, Lazonick and Leunig concluded that, as far as labor costs were concerned, ring spinning was cheaper than mule spinning for all counts. Leunig showed that labor cost savings increased in the count spun. 20

Mule weft yarn was wound into packages that were lighter than the wooden bobbin needed for ring weft yarn. Sandberg showed that ring spinning increased the transportation costs of weft yarn by 200%. Lazonick showed that it cost as much to return bobbins as to send them, and that there was always the possibility that some or all of the bobbins would be lost or broken. The extra cost per pound of shipping ring weft would then rise by 500%. Transportation costs for twist yarn varied much less: Leunig /uniFB01 nds the transport cost of shipping ring twist yarn to be larger by a value between 24% and 100%. 21

## 2.5. Vertical organization of the industry

There were four types of /uniFB01 rms in the industry. Each type of /uniFB01 rm could own more than one plant.

The /uniFB01 rst two types were /uniFB01 rms that specialized in either spinning or weaving. For example, the /uniFB01 rmBolling owned four plants in Bolton in 1833, and the four of them were dedicated only to spinning. These were vertically specialized /uniFB01 rms, or spinning-only or weaving-only /uniFB01 rms.

Then there were /uniFB01 rms that were vertically integrated in a strict sense: they were spinning and weaving in the same building. For example, in 1833 the /uniFB01 rm Birley and Kirk owned a /uniFB01 rm in Manchester where 931 spinners and 471 weavers worked. These were vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms.

Finally, there were /uniFB01 rms that were vertically integrated in a loose sense: they were both spinning and weaving but in two different plants. For example, the /uniFB01 rm Had /uniFB01 eld and Frost owned two plants in Warrington in 1833: one plant had 143 spinners while the other plant had 192 weavers. These were vertically combined /uniFB01 rms. 22

There is a rich literature on the advantages and disadvantages of specialization in the production of cotton. On one hand, Farnie (1979, page 319) has argued that ' by compartmentalizing technical knowledge , vertical specialization ' ' accentuated the vertical ignorance of both spinners and manufacturers, [...] it insulated spinners from the ultimate market for woven goods, hindered them

Source: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1885, 1886 -7, 1890, 1893 -4, 1902 and 1910.

Table 1 Fineness.

| 1                | 12              | 2                       | 23            | 3                    |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------------------|---------------|----------------------|
| Twist 0 - 20     | Twist in 10s    | Twist 20 - 40           | Twist 20 - 40 | Twist N 40           |
| Weft 0 - 30      | Weft in 20s     | Weft 20 - 40            | Weft in 40s   | Weft N 50            |
| Alhambra         | Chasmeres       | Calico                  | Dhooties      | Cambrics             |
| Beaverteens      | Colored goods   | Check, Nainsook         | Jacconettes   | Check, dimity        |
| Cords            | Cotton Italians | Covers                  | Lenos         | Check, lawn          |
| Crapes           | Domestics       | Dobbies                 | Mulls         | Dimities             |
| Denim            | Florentines     | Flannellettes           | Sateen        | Fancy white goods    |
| Drill            | Grandrills      | Fustians                | Turkey reds   | Gingham, /uniFB01 ne |
| Flannel          | Mottles         | Gingham                 | Velvet        | Silk velvets         |
| Honeycomb towels | Nankeens        | Gingham, Chambray       | Velveteen     |                      |
| Huckaback        | Regattas        | Handkerchief            |               |                      |
| Imperials        | Satin tops      | Harvards &amp; Oxfords      |               |                      |
| Lambskins        | Stripe          | India &amp; China shirtings |               |                      |
| Mexicans         | T cloths        | Jeannettes              |               |                      |
| Osnaburg         | Ticks           | Long cloth              |               |                      |
| Sheeting         | Twills          | Madapollams             |               |                      |
| Sheeting, heavy  | Worsted cords   | Muslins                 |               |                      |
| Swansdowns       | Zephyrs         | Pique                   |               |                      |
| Towels           |                 | Printers                |               |                      |
| Turkish towels   |                 | Prints                  |               |                      |
|                  |                 | Sheeting, Bleached      |               |                      |
|                  |                 | Sheeting, wide          |               |                      |
|                  |                 | Shirting                |               |                      |
|                  |                 | Tanjibs                 |               |                      |
|                  |                 | Toile                   |               |                      |
|                  |                 | Zephyrs                 |               |                      |

Notes: this classi /uniFB01 cation is constructed using the products that the /uniFB01 rms claimed to be manufacturing. This approach ensures that the classi /uniFB01 cation is internally consistent with the data on spindles and mules reported in the directories.

from producing the yarns best suited to speci /uniFB01 c types of cloth. ' Similarly, using data from the 1841 Inspector Horner's Factory Reports, Gatrell (1977) argues that if there were advantages for the /uniFB01 rms that were spinning and weaving, then these advantages were not derived from their larger size in and of itself, but from ' internal economies in the costs otherwise incurred in selling, buying, and transporting yarns. ' On the other hand, Jewkes (1930, page 96) argued that specialization gave /uniFB01 rms the ability to adapt to ' the changing conditions of the market and the scale of production: [...] the multiplicity of /uniFB01 nished products and the different technique demanded for maximum ef /uniFB01 ciency in spinning and weaving /uniFB01 rms [forced] the separation in the ownership and control of the two processes. ' Also, Huberman (1990) has argued that after 1850, ' new /uniFB01 rms tended to specialize in spinning or weaving because large integrated /uniFB01 rms faced a managerial constraint [because they were] unable to monitor and supervise their work forces effectively. ' 23 Saxonhouse and Wright (1984, page 518) also claimed that ' the newer /uniFB01 rms and mills were specialized and, in conjunction with highly developed markets and marketing facilities, [...] were able to exploit distinct managerial talents and abilities as well as economies of long production runs for standard counts of yarn . In this paper, I stay away ' from determining which of those advantages and disadvantages dominated, and I look only at the ring adoption behavior of the two organizational forms.

## 3. Data

The data are from Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory of 1885, 1886 -7, 1890, 1893 -4, 1902 and 1910. These data contain information on the names of the /uniFB01 rms, locations, and types of spindle used by cotton /uniFB01 rms in Lancashire. They also contain information on the number of spindles (and looms) used by each /uniFB01 rm, the /uniFB01 neness of the product manufactured and whether the /uniFB01 rm spun both twist and weft yarn.

An important step in the coding of the data consists of determining the /uniFB01 neness of cloth. To this end, I have followed two approaches, compared their results, and then checked their consistency against each other. First I have used the Cotton Manufactures, Report of the Tariff Board on Schedule I of the Tariff Law, House of Representatives, Washington, 1912. The report presents a section that associates the range of counts for yarn to the type of cloth produced: for example, ' Heavy Sheeting ' is produced with twist yarn of count 12, and with weft yarn of count 16. Another example is ' Shirting , which is produced with twist '

Table 2

Spinning capacity in Lancashire.

Table 2 provides the summary statistics for the cotton /uniFB01 rms in Lancashire in 1890. The /uniFB01 rst row gives the percentage of industry output by /uniFB01 rm type in 1890. Spinner-only /uniFB01 rms owned 64.4% of the total spindleage in 1890. 25 In 1902, the spinner-only /uniFB01 rms controlled 71.0% of the spindle capacity. By 1910, they controlled 78.8%. Notice that this number is the same as the one reported by Lazonick. 26 Thus, spinner-only /uniFB01 rms increased their spinning capacity over time.

| Total number of spindles (%)   | Spinners only   | Vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms   |
|--------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------------|
| 1890                           | 64.4            | 35.6                                 |
| 1902                           | 71.0            | 29.0                                 |
| 1910                           | 78.8            | 21.2                                 |
| Number of /uniFB01 rms by type |                 |                                      |
| 1890 (%)                       | 557 (62.2)      | 350 (37.8)                           |
| 1902 (%)                       | 556 (64.9)      | 300 (35.0)                           |
| 1910 (%)                       | 683 (70.7)      | 283 (29.3)                           |

Data: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1890, 1902 and 1910.

The reported numbers of observations do not include /uniFB01 rms for which information is missing.

Table 3

The best practice choice of technique.

|                                                                        | Twist      | Weft       |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|------------|
| Not including transportation costs (vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm) | 0 - 40 (R) | 0 - 40 (R) |
|                                                                        | 40+ (M)    | 40+ (M)    |
| Including transportation costs (non-integrated /uniFB01 rm)            | 0 - 40 (R) | (M)        |
| Including transportation costs (non-integrated /uniFB01 rm)            | 40+ (M)    | (M)        |

Sources: Leunig Myth , Table 24, p. 66, is used to compute the labor and raw cotton costs. Lazonick ' Factor Spinning, ' Table II, p. 101, is used to compute the transportation costs. For example, Leunig reports that the net savings from the adoption of ring spinning were equal to 0.11 cents per pound: ring spinning would have saved 0.41 cents in labor costs but would have increased by 0.30 cents the raw cotton costs. Lazonick computes the additional transportation costs for weft to be equal to 0.54 cents per pound.

Note: the capital letter in parentheses denotes the best practice. For example, rings were the best technique for counts 0/40 in vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms.

yarn of count 28 and weft yarn of count in the 30s. This classi /uniFB01 cation does not cover all the types of cloths. When a type of cloth is not included, I look for a /uniFB01 rmthat also produces another type of cloth that is in the book and infer the classi /uniFB01 cation for the one that is not in the book. Then I used the information from Worrall's Directories. I reasonably assumed that /uniFB01 rms producing both yarn and cloth will choose a range of counts for yarn that can be used by their weavers to produce cloth. I have done a consistency check between the two methods and the results are perfectly consistent. The results are presented in Table 1. 24

The last rows of Table 2 show that the number of spinner-only /uniFB01 rms increased between 1890 and 1910, while the number of vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms declined.

Just by looking at Table 2, it is already dif /uniFB01 cult to reconcile the dramatic increase in the number of spinner-only /uniFB01 rms, and in their capacity of spindles, with the idea that vertical integration was the most ef /uniFB01 cient way to manufacture cotton. It would have taken a truly impressive degree of ineptitude on the part of the British entrepreneurs to justify these patterns in the data.

## 4. Did British entrepreneurs fail?

In this section, I /uniFB01 rst provide new evidence on the importance of transportation costs in the cotton industry. Then I check, one by one, all of the deductive arguments used by Lazonick, and see if there are fallacies in them that can be uncovered by the /uniFB01 rmlevel data.

Fig. 1. Location of cotton mills in Blackburn, 1890 -1893. Source: Ordnance Survey Map of Blackburn, Great Britain, Sheet no. 62.16, surveyed 1892, published 1894. Legend: W = weaver; S = spinner; I = integrated /uniFB01 rm. w = producing only weft yarn; t = producing only twist yarn; tw = producing both weft and twist yarns.

<!-- image -->

## 4.1. Transportation costs

As discussed in the introduction, the crucial insight of Lazonick's analysis is that the transportation costs of shipping ring yarn were signi /uniFB01 cantly larger than those of shipping mule yarn, and thus British entrepreneurs should have vertically integrated in order to escape the higher transportation costs of shipping ring yarn. Table 3 shows the conclusions that can be drawn from the new calculations made by Leunig for labor and raw cotton costs, and the calculations made by Lazonick for transportation costs. The /uniFB01 rst row shows that vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms, which could escape transportation costs, should have chosen rings to produce weft and twist yarn of counts lower than 40. The second row shows that non-integrated /uniFB01 rms should have chosen rings to produce twist yarn of counts lower than 40, but should never have chosen rings to produce weft yarn.

The best place to begin the empirical analysis is to look more carefully at some evidence on the actual magnitude of transportation costs. In abstract, the transportation costs could be quite large, as Sandberg, Lazonick, and Leunig showed in their detailed analysis. The relevant issue here is whether, in practice, the costs were actually as large. As Leunig observed, if /uniFB01 rms were geographically close to each other then, in practice, transportation costs would be negligible. Using aggregate data, Leunig identi /uniFB01 ed ' co-located ' districts, where weaving capacity exceeded total spinning output. Here, I take another step in this direction.

## 4.1.1. Evidence from the Ordnance Survey

I match the information from Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory of 1890 with historical maps published as part of the Ordnance Survey conducted in 1891 and 1892 in Great Britain. I look at the distribution of cotton mills in the centre of two towns, Blackburn and Preston. For both of them I identify whether a cotton mill corresponds to a weaver, a spinner, or an integrated /uniFB01 rm. Then, I identify whether the spinners or the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms produce both weft and twist yarns, or just one of the two.

Fig. 1 looks at the case of Blackburn. We observe that /uniFB01 rms were locating their plants (mills) close to each other and to the canal. Eanam Bridge Mill was a spinning /uniFB01 rm, producing only weft yarns. In the adjacent building, Rose Hill Mill was an integrated /uniFB01 rm and produced both twist and weft yarns. In the building in front, the Wharf Street Mill housed a weaver. Clearly, spinning and weaving plants were located very closely together, suggesting that the transportation costs would have been negligible.

Fig. 2 shows that Blackburn was not an exception. We can count as many as ten mills in the centre of Preston. The survey shows that in Preston the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm John Goodair &amp; Co. owned the Brook /uniFB01 eld Mill and the Peel Mill. John Goodair &amp; Co. spun only weft yarn. In the building in front of the Brook /uniFB01 eld Mill (which occupied two buildings) was the Southgate Mill, owned by the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith spun both twist and weft yarns. Within a short distance, there were four weavers-only, one spinner-only and another vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm. Nothing in the data indicates whether these nine /uniFB01 rms were in a business relationship, but vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms were located in a district with several /uniFB01 rms that were all closely located. Notice that the Peel Mill was not located in the proximity of the Brook /uniFB01 eld Mill.

Both Figs. 1 and 2 tell the same tale. Firms of all types (spinners, weavers, and vertically integrated) were all located near each other. Ideally, one could construct maps for all districts and all /uniFB01 rms, and could even compute the distances between mills as a measure of transportation costs. Yet the main /uniFB01 nding would remain the same: while transportation costs were potentially large, in practice they were most likely negligible.

## 4.1.2. Firms and plants

Another approach to show that transportation costs had to be negligible consists of looking for counter-examples. I look for vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms that do not manufacture both weft and twist in-house. This would provide evidence that even vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms were willing to pay the transportation costs. The driving idea is to use the distinction between plant and /uniFB01 rm. This distinction is important here because /uniFB01 rms often shared the same plant (here meant as a physical bulding), or one /uniFB01 rm controlled more than one plant. 27

The new /uniFB01 rm-level data clarify that /uniFB01 rms that both wove and spun might very well have been engaging in those two activities at different plants. For example, in 1890 the /uniFB01 rm Taylor located in Blackburn owned 111,800 spindles and 2152 looms. The /uniFB01 rm distributed its production among six mills. Fig. 1 shows that at least one of them, the Bridge Water Mill, was not close to any of the other /uniFB01 ve mills owned by the /uniFB01 rm. The closest mills to the Bridge Water Mill were owned by two weaver-only /uniFB01 rms. Thus, we know that the Bridge Water Mill was owned by a vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm, but we do not know whether the Bridge Water Mill both spun and wove or did only one of the two. 28

In only a few exceptions is information available on how /uniFB01 rms distributed their productions across plants. These exceptions can be used as a counter-example to Lazonick's claim that entrepreneurs should have vertically integrated in order to escape the higher transportation costs of shipping ring yarn. In the 1902 edition of Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, the /uniFB01 rm Halliday &amp; Constantine owned the Dicconson Mill at Wigan where it only spun (using ring spindles) and the Upper Mills in Golborne, where it only wove. This /uniFB01 rm was de /uniFB01 nitively not vertically integrated. Another counter-example was given by the /uniFB01 rm Had /uniFB01 eld and Frost, which owned two plants in Warrington in 1833: one plant had 143 spinners while the other plant had 192 weavers. One could also construct numerous counter-examples by showing the large degree of heterogeneity in the

mill

Fig. 2. Location of cotton mills in Preston, 1890 -1893. Source: Ordnance Survey Map of Preston, Great Britain, Sheet no. 62.16, surveyed 1892, published 1894. Legend: W = weaver; S = spinner; I = integrated /uniFB01 rm. w = producing only weft yarn; t = producing only twist yarn; tw = producing both weft and twist yarns.

<!-- image -->

Adoption patterns in 1887, 1890 and 1894.

Source: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1885, 1886 -7, 1890 and 1893 -4.

Table 4a

| Name of the /uniFB01 rm   | District              | Type in 1885   | Type in 1887   | Spindles in 1887   |
|---------------------------|-----------------------|----------------|----------------|--------------------|
| Bury Cotton               | Bury                  | VI             | VI             | [50,000]           |
| Heywood                   | Heywood               | S              | S              | 19,296             |
| Meanock                   | Mossley               | 0              | S              | [16,500]           |
| Palm Mill                 | Oldham                | S              |                | 40,000             |
| Castleton                 | Rochdale              | S              | S S            | 26,000             |
| Haugh                     | Rochdale              | 0              | S              | 25,300             |
| New Lady                  | Rochdale              | S              | S              | 16,016             |
| Newhey                    | Rochdale              | 0              | S              | 35,200             |
| Lees                      |                       | S              | S              | [20,000]           |
|                           | Warrington            |                |                |                    |
|                           |                       | Type in 1887   | Type in 1890   | Spindles in 1890   |
| Smithson Greenacres       | Oldham Oldham         | S              | S              | [114,034]          |
| Taylor                    | Denton                | S              | S              | 1800               |
| Shepley                   | Glossop               | VI             | VI             | 5420               |
|                           | Golborne              | S              | S              | 2400               |
| Walker                    | Hyde                  | S              | S              | [40,900]           |
| Pendleton                 | Manchester            | W              | S              | 12,000             |
| Victoria                  | Manchester            | S              | S              | [44,500]           |
| Cambridge                 | Oldham                | S              | S              | 4736               |
| Clough                    | Oldham                | S              | S              | 1184               |
| Lees H.                   | Oldham                | S              | S              | 8000               |
| Textile Mill              |                       | S              | S              | [95,520]           |
| Allen Bros.               | Radcliffe             | VI             | S              | 10,000             |
| Arkwright                 | Rochdale              | S              | S              | 23,000             |
| Healey                    | Rochdale              | S              | S              | 9800               |
| Walker                    | Rochdale              | S              | S              | 36,000             |
|                           |                       | Type in 1890   | Type in 1894   | Spindles in 1894   |
| Bayley                    | Bolton                | S              | S              | [100,360]          |
| Holdsworth                | Bolton                | S              | S              | [47,000]           |
| Wolfenden                 | Bolton                | S              | S              | [57,000]           |
| Witham                    | Burnley               | VI             | VI             | [48,504]           |
| Alcock                    | Bury                  | VI             | VI             | 2316               |
| Bury &amp; Elton              | Bury                  | VI             | VI             | [50,000]           |
| Vulcan                    | Bury                  | 0              | VI             | 40,000             |
| Alpha Mill                | Denton                | S              | S              | [57,000]           |
| Burns                     | Heywood               | 0              | S              | 43,000             |
| Kay Richard               | Heywood               | S              | S              | 25,000             |
| Taylor James              | Heywood               | S              | S              | 7000               |
| Hibbert                   | Hyde                  | VI             | VI             | 1480               |
| Garlick &amp; Dyson           | Manchester            | S              |                |                    |
| Hanover Mill              | Manchester            | S              | S S            | [30,000] 17,000    |
| Holdsworth                | Manchester            | VI             | VI             | 26,000             |
| Johnson                   | Manchester            | S              | S              | 10,000             |
| Middleton                 | Middleton             | S              | S              | 9024               |
| Busk                      | Oldham                | 0              | S              | 6400               |
| Clegg                     | Oldham                | VI             | VI             | 75,326             |
| Glodwick                  | Oldham                |                | S              | 79,968             |
| Holden                    | Oldham                | S S            | S              | [8180]             |
| Lees                      | Oldham                | S              | S              | [75,000]           |
| Seville                   | Oldham                | S              | S              | 1648               |
| Stock Lane                | Oldham                | S              | S              | 10,000             |
| Park Lane                 | Preston               |                | S              | [50,000]           |
| Rostron                   | Radcliffe             | S W            | VI             | 16,000             |
| Balderstone               | Rochdale              | S              | S              | 17,000             |
| Eagle                     | Rochdale              | 0              | S              | [89,000]           |
| Tattersall                | Rochdale              | VI             | VI             | [15,000]           |
| Yates                     | Rochdale              | VI             | VI             | 8000               |
| Jackson Uppermill         | Stalybridge Uppermill | 0 S            | VI S           | 4000 10,280        |
| May Mill                  | Wigan                 | 0              | S              | 21,600             |

Notes:

- (1) If the /uniFB01 rm was a spinner-only, then it is coded S; a weaver-only is coded W; vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms are coded VI.
- (2) If the /uniFB01 rm is a new entrant, then a 0 is reported for the preceding period.
- (3) If the /uniFB01 rm reports the number of spindles, but does not say how many of them are rings, then the number of spindles is reported in brackets.

Adoption patterns in 1902.

Source: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1893 -4 and 1902.

Table 4b

| Name of the /uniFB01 rm    | District      | Type in 1894   | Type in 1902   | Spindles in 1902   |
|----------------------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|--------------------|
| Imperial Mill              | Blackburn     | 0              | S              | 67,000             |
| Brook /uniFB01 eld         | Bolton        | S              | S              | [25,000]           |
| Lord                       | Bolton        | S              | S              | [85,640]           |
| Moorlands                  | Bolton        | 0              | S              | [32,340]           |
| Park Mill                  | Bolton        | S              | S              | [102,882]          |
| Thornber                   | Burnley       | VI             | VI             | 43,000             |
| Higher Mill                | Bury          | S              | S              | 6400               |
| Century                    | Farnsworth    | 0              | S              | 51,000             |
| Nuttall                    | Farnsworth    | VI             | VI             | [87,500]           |
| Record                     | Golborne      | 0              | S              | 31,190             |
| Brook                      | Heywood       | S              | S              | [26,000]           |
| Healey                     | Heywood       | 0              | S              | 8500               |
| Mutual                     | Heywood       | S              | S              | [160,000]          |
| Roach                      | Heywood       | S              | S              | [43,000]           |
| Christy                    | Manchester    | VI             | VI             | [21,000]           |
| Pendlebury                 | Manchester    | S              | S              | 31,200             |
| Taylor                     | Manchester    | S              | S              | 2276               |
| Irk Mill                   | Middleton     | S              | S              | [40,000]           |
| Tonge Vale                 | Middleton     | S              | S              | 6808               |
| Wood                       | Middleton     | S              | S              | 20,000             |
| Egmont                     | Mossley       | 0              | S              | 7000               |
| Booth                      | Oldham        | S              | S S            | 1300               |
| County End                 | Oldham        | S              | S              | 2304 8000          |
| Dawn Mill King Spinn.      | Oldham        | 0 0            |                |                    |
| Lamb Mills                 | Oldham        |                | S              | 17,880             |
|                            | Oldham        | 0              | S              | 10,000             |
| Nile                       | Oldham        | 0              | S              | 64,000             |
| Oldham                     | Oldham        | S              | S              | [88,512]           |
| Oxford Mill Pearl Mill     | Oldham Oldham | S S            | S S            | [40,000] 6228      |
| Stott James                | Oldham        | S              | S              |                    |
|                            |               |                |                | 25,000             |
| Tay                        | Oldham        | S              | S              | [28,200]           |
| Taylor James Taylor Thomas | Oldham Oldham | S S            | S S            | 4432 3840          |
| Catterall                  | Preston       | S              | S              | [39,536]           |
| Park Lane                  | Preston       | S              | S              |                    |
| Era Mill Co.               | Rochdale      | 0              | S              | [50,000]           |
| Holt &amp; Ogden               | Rochdale      |                | S              | 59,600             |
| Union Ring                 | Rochdale      | S W            | S              | 14,000 40,000      |
| Cheetam                    | Stalybridge   | VI             |                | 16,000             |
| Leech                      | Stalybridge   | VI             | VI VI          | 4800               |
| Nuttal                     | Stalybridge   | S              | S              | 20,000             |
| Stalybridge                | Stalybridge   | S              | S              | 1920               |
| Brunswick                  | Stockport     | S              | S              |                    |
| Lowe                       | Stockport     |                |                | 10,000             |
| Moorhouse                  | Stockport     | VI S           | VI S           | 9000               |
| Stockport                  | Stockport     | 0              | S              | 30,700             |
| Barker                     | Todmorden     | VI             | VI             | 64,456             |
| Greenwood                  | Todmorden     | S              | S              | 7500               |
| Eccles                     | Uppermill     | 0              | S              | 7020 [35,000]      |
| Halliday                   | Wigan         | S              | S              | 10,000             |

## Notes:

- (1) If the /uniFB01 rm was a spinner-only, then it is coded S; a weaver-only is coded W; vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms are coded VI.
- (2) If the /uniFB01 rm is a new entrant, then a 0 is reported for the preceding period.
- (3) If the /uniFB01 rm reports the number of spindles, but does not say how many of them are rings, then the number of spindles is reported in brackets.

ratio of spindles to looms at vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms, which suggests that these /uniFB01 rms did outsource some of the weaving or spinning to specialized /uniFB01 rms. 29

It is inappropriate to generalize from a few /uniFB01 rms to the entire industry, but it is clear that the unit of observation should be the plant (mill) rather than the /uniFB01 rm. If the distinction between plants and /uniFB01 rms is introduced, then even what Lazonick classi /uniFB01 ed as

Source: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1902 and 1910.

Table 4c Adoption patterns in 1910.

| Name of /uniFB01 rm              | District              | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   | Name of /uniFB01 rm   | District 1902)                        | Type in 1910 (Type in   | Name of /uniFB01 rm          | District                            | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   | Name of /uniFB01 rm   | District   | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------|------------|-------------------------------|
| Canal Mills Roe Greave           | Accrington            | VI                            | Broad Mills           | Glossop                               | VI VI                   | United                       | Oldham                              | S                             | Goyt                  | Stockport  | S*                            |
| Stanhill                         | Accrington Accrington | VI                            | Gartside              | Glossop Glossop                       |                         | Wood J.                      | Oldham                              | S                             | Hollins               | Stockport  | VI                            |
|                                  |                       | S*                            | Platt                 |                                       | VI                      | Ingham W.                    | Padiham                             | VI                            | Hollins, Marple       | Stockport  | VI                            |
| Gartside                         | Ashton                | VI                            | Rhodes                | Glossop                               | VI                      | Calvert I                    | Preston                             | VI                            | Howard                | Stockport  | S                             |
| Heginbottom                      | Ashton                | VI                            | Sumner                | Glossop                               | VI                      | Calvert II                   | Preston                             | VI                            | Kershaw               | Stockport  | VI                            |
| Hurst Mills Kershaw              | Ashton                | VI                            | Wood                  | Glossop                               | VI                      | Copland                      | Preston                             | S                             | Kingston              | Stockport  | S                             |
| James                            | Ashton                | S                             | Thompson              | Great Harwood                         | VI                      | Dewhurst                     | Preston                             | VI                            | Mellor                | Stockport  | S                             |
| Mason Thomas                     | Ashton                | S                             | Hazel Mill            | Haslingden                            | S                       | Eccles Brot.                 | Preston                             | VI                            | Palmer                | Stockport  | S                             |
| Mellor Thomas                    | Ashton                | VI                            | Albert                | Heywood                               | S                       | Eccles T.                    | Preston                             | VI                            | Pearson               | Stockport  | VI                            |
| Reyner                           | Ashton                | VI                            | Hodgkinsons           | Heywood                               | S                       | Eccles W.                    | Preston                             | VI                            | Shepley               | Stockport  | VI                            |
| Whittakers                       | Ashton                | VI                            | Hopwood               | Heywood                               | S                       | Hartford                     | Preston                             | VI                            | Stockport 2           | Stockport  | S*                            |
| Coddington                       |                       |                               |                       |                                       |                         |                              |                                     |                               | Stockport 3           | Stockport  |                               |
|                                  | Blackburn             | VI                            | Isherwood             | Heywood                               | S                       | Hawkins                      | Preston                             | VI                            |                       |            | S*                            |
| Codling &amp; H. Daisy /uniFB01 eld  | Blackburn             | VI                            | Park Street           | Heywood                               | S                       | Leigh                        | Preston                             | VI                            | Vernon                | Stockport  | S*                            |
| Ring                             | Blackburn             | S*                            | Railway               | Heywood                               | S                       | Orr                          | Preston                             | VI                            | Warks                 | Stockport  | VI                            |
| Dugdale Thomas                   | Blackburn             | VI                            | Roe Acre              | Heywood                               | S                       | Oxhey                        | Preston                             | VI                            | Barker W.             | Todmorden  | VI                            |
| Fish John                        | Blackburn             | VI                            | Sefton Mill           | Heywood                               | VI                      | Paley                        | Preston                             | VI*                           | Dugdale               | Todmorden  | VI                            |
| Hindle E. &amp; G.                   | Blackburn             | VI(W)                         | Unity                 | Heywood                               | S*                      | Preston                      | Preston                             | VI                            | Fielden               | Todmorden  | VI                            |
| Hollin Bank Ring                 | Blackburn             | S*                            | Ashton                | Hyde                                  | VI                      | Preston                      | Tulketh                             | S*                            | Sutcliffe             | Todmorden  | S*                            |
| Lewis Brothers                   | Blackburn             | VI                            | Slack Mills           | Hyde                                  | VI                      | Black Lane                   | Radcliffe                           | S*                            | Vic Mill              | Uppermill  | S*                            |
| Longwoth Mellor                  | Blackburn Blackburn   | VI S*                         | Storey Jones          | Lancaster Leigh                       | S VI                    | Radcliffe Wilton             | Radcliffe Radcliffe                 | S                             | Pickup                | Waterfoot  | VI                            |
| Rishton                          | Blackburn             |                               |                       |                                       |                         |                              |                                     | S*                            | Shepherd              | Waterfoot  | S                             |
|                                  |                       | VI                            | Burton                | Leigh                                 | VI                      | Cuba                         | Ramsbottom                          | S*                            | ShepherdR.            | Waterfoot  | S                             |
| Thompson                         | Blackburn             |                               |                       | Littleborough                         |                         |                              | Rawtenstall                         |                               |                       | Waterfoot  | VI                            |
|                                  |                       | VI                            | Clegg E.              |                                       | VI                      | Ashworth                     |                                     | VI                            | Whitewell             |            |                               |
| Ainsworth                        | Bolton                | S                             | Sladen                | Littleborough                         | VI                      | Newchurch                    | Rawtenstall                         | VI                            | Brown                 | Wigan      | VI                            |
| Brown                            | Bolton                | S                             | Acme                  | Manchester                            | S*                      | Rawtenstall                  | Rawtenstall                         | VI                            | Crescent              | Wigan      | S*                            |
| Crosses                          | Bolton                | S                             | Armitage              | Manchester                            | VI                      | Globe                        | Rawtenstall                         | VI                            | Eckersleys            | Wigan      | VI                            |
|                                  | Bolton                | S                             | Armitage 2            | Manchester                            | VI                      | Blackpits                    |                                     | VI                            | Empress               | Wigan      | S*                            |
| Greenhalgh                       |                       |                               |                       |                                       |                         |                              | Rochdale                            |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Hamer Hesketh                    | Bolton Bolton         | S S                           | Ashworth Barlein      | Manchester S Manchester               | S                       | Bridge /uniFB01 eld Brierley | Rochdale Rochdale                   | S* VI                         | Woods                 | Wigan      |                               |
| Maco                             | Bolton                | S*                            | Bannerman             | Manchester                            | S                       | Bright                       | Rochdale                            | VI                            |                       |            |                               |
| Marsden                          | Bolton                | S                             | Broadbent 1           | Manchester                            | S                       | Broadley                     | Rochdale                            | VI                            |                       |            |                               |
| North End                        | Bolton                | S                             | Broadbent 2           | Manchester                            | S                       | Coral Mill                   | Rochdale                            | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
| Tootal Folds                     | Bolton Burnley        | VI VI                         | Eccles Ermen &amp; R.     | Manchester Manchester                 | VI*                     | Crest Ring Dale              | Rochdale Rochdale                   | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
| Hill Top                         | Burnley               | VI                            | Gladstone             | Manchester                            | S S                     | Dicken                       | Rochdale                            | S* S*                         |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       |                               |                       |                                       |                         |                              |                                     | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
|                                  | Burnley               | VI                            | Langworthy            | Manchester                            |                         |                              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Oxford                           | Burnley               | VI                            |                       |                                       | VI                      |                              |                                     | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
| Trafalgar                        |                       |                               | Regent Mill           |                                       |                         | Eastwood                     | Rochdale                            |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Bury Coop Bury &amp; Heap Hutchinson | Bury Bury Bury        | VI VI VI                      | Richardson Rylands    | Manchester Manchester S Manchester VI | S*                      | Facit Hamer Hargreaves       | Rochdale Rochdale Rochdale          | S VI                          |                       |            |                               |
| Kenyon                           | Bury Bury             | VI*                           | Togo Spin. Cromer     | Manchester S* Middleton Middleton     | S* S* S*                | Higham Hoyle                 | Rochdale Rochdale Rochdale Rochdale | VI VI                         |                       |            |                               |
| Kenyon                           |                       | VI                            |                       |                                       |                         |                              |                                     | VI                            |                       |            |                               |
| Mellor                           | Bury Bury             | VI                            | Soudan Clark &amp; W.     | Mossley                               |                         | Millgate Orr J&amp;S             |                                     | VI                            |                       |            |                               |
| New Victoria Openshaw            | Bury                  | VI                            | Hopkins               | Mossley                               | S*                      | Parker &amp; H.                  | Rochdale                            | S                             |                       |            |                               |
| Openshaw W. Pilot                | Bury                  | VI                            | Mossley               | Mossley                               | S*                      | Rochdale                     | Rochdale                            | VI                            |                       |            |                               |
|                                  | Bury                  | S*                            | Belgrave Briar Mill   | Oldham Oldham                         | S* S*                   | Shawforth Sparth             | Rochdale Rochdale                   | VI S                          |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       | VI                            |                       | Oldham                                |                         | Stuttard                     |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Scho /uniFB01 eld                | Bury                  | VI                            | Butterworth           |                                       | VI                      |                              |                                     | VI                            |                       |            |                               |
| Walker &amp; L.                      | Bury                  | S                             | Clegg Broth.          | Oldham                                | S                       |                              | Rochdale                            | S                             |                       |            |                               |
| Birtwistle                       |                       |                               |                       |                                       | S*                      | Townhead Valley              | Rochdale                            |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Coppull                          | Chorley               | VI                            | Copster Mill          | Oldham                                |                         |                              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Cowling                          | Chorley Chorley       | S*                            | Fitton Fox Mills      |                                       |                         |                              | Rochdale                            | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       | S*                            |                       | Oldham                                | S*                      | Victoria Well /uniFB01       | Rochdale                            | S                             |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       |                               |                       |                                       |                         | eld                          | Rochdale                            | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
| Talbot                           | Chorley               |                               |                       | Oldham                                |                         |                              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
|                                  | Chorley               | VI                            | Iris Mill             | Oldham                                | S*                      |                              | Rochdale                            | S                             |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       | VI*                           | Lees Union Lily Mill  | S                                     |                         |                              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       |                               |                       | Oldham Oldham                         | S*                      | Whitworth Byrom              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Garnett                          | Clitheroe             | VI                            |                       |                                       |                         |                              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       |                               |                       |                                       |                         |                              | Rochdale                            | VI Stalybridge S              |                       |            |                               |
|                                  |                       |                               |                       | VI                                    |                         |                              |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Nixon &amp; K.                       |                       |                               |                       |                                       |                         | Whitaker                     |                                     |                               |                       |            |                               |

Table 4a lists the /uniFB01 rms that reported the use of ring spinning in 1887, 1890 and 1894. 30 I also use data from 1885 and 1887 to show whether /uniFB01 rms changed their vertical structure by the time they had adopted ring spinning in 1887. The /uniFB01 rms reported in Table 4a are the early adopters of rings in the Lancashire cotton industry. The table reports whether the /uniFB01 rm was a spinneronly (S), a weaver-only (W) or vertically integrated (VI). I also report the name of the /uniFB01 rm (abbreviated), the district where the /uniFB01 rm was located, and the number of ring spindles that were owned by the /uniFB01 rm in each of those /uniFB01 ve years. The /uniFB01 rm might also report mule spindles but for the sake of simplicity they are not reported in the table. If the /uniFB01 rm reports the number of spindles but does not say how many of them are rings and how many are mules, then the number of spindles is reported in brackets. Table 4b lists the /uniFB01 rms that reported the use of ring spinning in 1902, and is organized in the same fashion as Table 4a. Table 4c lists the /uniFB01 rms that reported the use of ring spinning in 1910, but, for sake of brevity, does not report the number of ring spindles that they owned. 31

| Name of /uniFB01 rm   | District           | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   | Name of /uniFB01 rm   | District   | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   | Name of /uniFB01 rm   | District    | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   | Name of /uniFB01 rm   | District   | Type in 1910 (Type in 1902)   |
|-----------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------|------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------|------------|-------------------------------|
| Primrose              | Clitheroe          | S*                            | Napier                | Oldham     | S*                            | Millbrook             | Stalybridge | S                             |                       |            |                               |
| Darwen                | Darwen             | VI                            | Orme                  | Oldham     | S*                            | Premier               | Stalybridge | VI*                           |                       |            |                               |
| Eccles A.T.           | Darwen             | VI                            | Raven                 | Oldham     | S*                            | Ray Mills             | Stalybridge | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
| Gibraltar             | Denton             | VI                            | Richardson            | Oldham     | S                             | Staley                | Stalybridge | S                             |                       |            |                               |
| Dukin /uniFB01 eld    | Dukin /uniFB01 eld | S                             | Roy Mill              | Oldham     | S*                            | Storrs                | Stalybridge | S*                            |                       |            |                               |
| Barnes                | Farnsworth         | VI                            | Royton                | Oldham     | S*                            | Victor                | Stalybridge |                               |                       |            |                               |
| Dyson Eli             | Farnsworth         | S                             | Shaw Spinn.           | Oldham     | S                             | Wilkinson             | Stalybridge | S* S                          |                       |            |                               |

Notes:

- (1) If the /uniFB01 rm was a spinner-only, then it is coded S; a weaver-only is coded W; vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms are coded VI.
- (2) If the /uniFB01 rm is a new entrant, then a * is reported in addition to the type of /uniFB01 rm.

vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms could have spun and woven at different plants, facing the same transportation costs as the specialized /uniFB01 rms.

## 4.2. The adoption of ring spinning over time and across types of /uniFB01 rms

Column 1 of Table 5 shows the total cumulative number of /uniFB01 rms that adopted rings over time. In 1887, only 9 /uniFB01 rms reported that they had adopted ring spinning, and 3 of these were newly formed /uniFB01 rms relative to 1885. Of the other 6 /uniFB01 rms, we know that the /uniFB01 rm Bury Cotton Spinning and Manufacturing Co. (located in the district of Bury) had been in the industry since 1840; Heywood Cotton Spinning and Manufacturing Co. (in Heywood) since 1860 32 ; New Lady House Cotton Spinning Co. (in Rochdale) since 1877. Seven of these nine /uniFB01 rms were still in business in 1910, suggesting that they thrived after the adoption of ring spinning.

Twenty/uniFB01 ve /uniFB01 rms had adopted rings by 1890. This was still a small number relative to the total of almost 1000 /uniFB01 rms that were spinning yarn in Lancashire. Fifty-eight /uniFB01 rms had adopted rings by 1894. By 1902, the number of /uniFB01 rms that had adopted rings was already 109, around 10% of the total number of /uniFB01 rms in the industry. Three hundred and thirty /uniFB01 rms, or approximately one third of the spinning /uniFB01 rms in Lancashire, had adopted rings by 1910. Some remarkable ones, which adopted rings more than twenty years after this technology /uniFB01 rst became available, are the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm Bury &amp; Heap Commercial Co. (located in the Bury district), which had been in the industry since 1859, and the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm Ashton (in Hyde), which had been in the industry since 1780. These were presumably very well managed vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms and yet they did not adopt rings as soon as they could have done.

Finally, Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c show that the districts of Manchester, Oldham, and Rochdale contained the largest number of /uniFB01 rms that had adopted rings by 1902. By 1910, most of the districts had /uniFB01 rms that had adopted rings.

Wecannowcheckwhetherthe /uniFB01 rst of Lazonick's deductive arguments withstands the test of the new /uniFB01 rm-level data. Lazonick claimed that British entrepreneurs should have vertically integrated in order to escape the higher transportation costs of shipping ring yarn. One of his arguments was that ' ring spindles were installed disproportionately in integrated mills, 46% of all ring spindles being in these mills in 1913. ' 33 That is, Britain would have adopted rings much more quickly if more /uniFB01 rms had been vertically integrated.

4, 1902 and 1910.

Table 5 Ring adoption in Lancashire, 1887 -1910. Source: Worrall's Directories of Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers, 1885, 1886 -7, 1890, 1893 -

|   Year |   (1) |   (2) Total number of /uniFB01 rms Number of only-spinners at time of adoption |   (3) New /uniFB01 rms |   (4) New /uniFB01 rms only-spinners |   (5) Incumbent /uniFB01 rms changing organizational form |
|--------|-------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
|   1887 |     9 |                                                                              8 |                      3 |                                    3 |                                                         0 |
|   1890 |    25 |                                                                             23 |                      3 |                                    3 |                                                         3 |
|   1894 |    58 |                                                                             42 |                      9 |                                    8 |                                                         4 |
|   1902 |   109 |                                                                             87 |                     21 |                                   20 |                                                         5 |
|   1910 |   330 |                                                                            197 |                     80 |                                   74 |                                                         7 |

Notes: the numbers reported in all the columns of the table are cumulative. For example 25 /uniFB01 rms had adopted rings by 1890.

Column 2 of Table 5 reports the number of spinners-only that had adopted rings. By 1887, eight out of nine /uniFB01 rms reporting ring spindles were non-integrated. By 1890, 23 out of 25 were non-integrated. By 1902, only around 20% of the adopters were vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms.

One novel and striking /uniFB01 nding is that during the period between 1902 and 1910 vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms started adopting ring spinning in a systematic fashion. Of the 221 /uniFB01 rms that adopted rings between 1902 and 1910, 50% was vertically integrated. In 1910 the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms controlled 40% of the ring spindles in Lancashire, which is a /uniFB01 gure very close to the 46% found by Lazonick for 1913. Thus, Lazonick did not get the numbers wrong for 1913. What he got wrong was the projection back in time for the earlier years when, contrary to his conclusions, the non-integrated /uniFB01 rms were the /uniFB01 rst to adopt rings. Only after 1902, during the last period of expansion of the Lancashire cotton industry, did vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms start to adopt ring spinning. If integration had anything to do with failure, it would have been seen in the data since the very beginning. It did not.

The second of Lazonick's arguments was that the British continued to use new mules to replace retired mules, rather than adopting rings. To support this conjecture, Lazonick claimed that ' a large proportion of the increase in ring spindles consisted of ring-frames installed in new mills or extensions of old mills, and hence did not replace retired mules. ' 34

Column 3 of Table 5 shows that until 1902 almost all of the /uniFB01 rms that adopted rings were incumbents in the industry. Most of these /uniFB01 rms, already in the industry, were adopting rings to replace old mules or to expand their production. After 1902, many new /uniFB01 rms adopted rings as well. This is understandable: the /uniFB01 rst decade of the twentieth century was a period of great expansion for the Lancashire cotton industry, and it is natural that new entrants would also adopt rings. However, the key observation here is that by far the greatest number of /uniFB01 rms that adopted rings by 1910 was incumbents. The type of entrepreneurial failure imagined by Lazonick would have shown up in the data as new entrants adopting faster than the incumbents. 35 They did not. Only 24% of the /uniFB01 rms that had adopted rings by 1910 were new /uniFB01 rms.

Column 4 of Table 5 reinforces this observation by showing that most of the new /uniFB01 rms were spinner-only /uniFB01 rms. This observation is particularly striking when coupled with another one, which is underscored in Column 5 of Table 5: almost no /uniFB01 rm changed its organizational form (e.g. from being a spinner-only to being a vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm or vice versa) upon the adoption of ring spinning. Moreover, we can use the information in Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c to show that out of the seven /uniFB01 rms that changed organizational form, only Rostron in Rochdale and Hindle in Blackburn vertically integrated their weaving and spinning upon the adoption of ring spinning. The other /uniFB01 ve vertically de-integrated their operations.

Finally, we can use Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c to look at the number of ring spindles installed in order to learn about the distribution of the number of ring spindles installed. The idea here is the following: if it had been the case that ring spindles were installed in new mills or in extensions of old mills, then we would expect /uniFB01 rms to install a large number of spindles. If, instead, rings were being slowly adopted to replace retired mules, then we would observe much more variation in the number of spindles. Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the number of ring spindles installed in 1910. 36 It is clear that there was a very large number of small installations (one quarter of them for fewer than 8200 spindles), which is hard to reconcile with the idea that they were adopted by new /uniFB01 rms, and instead suggests that /uniFB01 rms were slowly replacing the old mules with new ring spindles.

## 4.3. The adoption of rings for weft yarn: integrated versus non-integrated /uniFB01 rms

The last of Lazonick's arguments is that the costs of shipping ring weft yarn were enormously larger for a non-integrated /uniFB01 rmthan for an integrated /uniFB01 rm. This made vertical integration even more economically ef /uniFB01 cient than specialization. To support this hypothesis, Lazonick claimed that ' prior to World War I ring-frames were rarely used for spinning weft yarns in non-integrated mills. ' 37

37

Lazonick (1981a,b, page 98).

Fig. 3. Distribution of newly installed ring spindles, 1910.

<!-- image -->

Earlier writers have assumed that vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms produced both twist and weft yarns. This was not necessarily true, as shown in Table 6. The top panel of Table 6 shows the distribution of /uniFB01 rms in the production of twist and weft yarns. We observe that both in 1890 and in 1910, approximately 70% of the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms were spinning both types. The remaining vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms had to buy either weft or twist to weave their cloth. These /uniFB01 rms were buying weft yarn on the market. For example, the /uniFB01 rms Thornber in Burnley, Nuttal in Farnsworth, Barker in Todmorden, and others had adopted rings to produce twist yarn. They were buying the weft yarn for their weaving production (or they were selling their surplus of twist yarn on the market). As already noted, not many of the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms were buying weft yarn (or selling twist yarn), but it is notable that few of these had actually adopted rings. This surprising result is even stronger for spinner-only /uniFB01 rms. Only around 60% of them were spinning both twist and weft. What is particularly cogent for the analysis here is that the percentages did not change between 1890 and 1910. This necessarily implies that vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms did not feel that is was necessary to produce both weft and twist in order to avoid the presumed cost of shipping ring weft yarn.

Table 6 Twist and weft yarns in Lancashire, 1890 and 1910.

|                                                     | Spinners only   | Vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms   | Total   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------------|---------|
| Percentage of /uniFB01 rms                          |                 |                                      |         |
| Only twist in 1890 (%)                              | 27.7            | 8.3                                  | 20.6    |
| Only weft in 1890 (%)                               | 14.8            | 20.2                                 | 16.7    |
| Twist and weft in 1890 (%)                          | 57.5            | 71.6                                 | 62.7    |
| Only twist in 1910 (%)                              | 22.5            | 9.0                                  | 18.5    |
| Only weft in 1910 (%)                               | 12.1            | 19.9                                 | 67.1    |
| Twist and weft in 1910 (%)                          | 65.4            | 71.1                                 | 14.3    |
| Percentage of spindleage capacity                   |                 |                                      |         |
| Only twist in 1890 (%)                              | 22.3            | 6.7                                  | 17.2    |
| Only weft in 1890 (%)                               | 8.4             | 8.9                                  | 8.6     |
| Twist and weft in 1890 (%)                          | 69.3            | 88.4                                 | 74.2    |
| Only twist in 1910 (%)                              | 14.5            | 5.5                                  | 12.8    |
| Only weft in 1910 (%)                               | 8.0             | 6.0                                  | 7.6     |
| Twist and weft in 1910 (%)                          | 77.5            | 88.5                                 | 79.6    |
| Percentage of spindleage capacity for counts 0 - 40 |                 |                                      |         |
| Only twist in 1890 (%)                              | 22.8            | 8.4                                  | 16.9    |
| Only weft in 1890 (%)                               | 6.6             | 6.2                                  | 6.5     |
| Twist and weft in 1890 (%)                          | 70.5            | 85.4                                 | 76.6    |
| Only twist in 1910 (%)                              | 21.9            | 6.7                                  | 17.2    |
| Only weft in 1910 (%)                               | 6.8             | 5.9                                  | 6.5     |
| Twist and weft in 1910 (%)                          | 71.3            | 87.4                                 | 76.3    |

Data: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1890 and 1910.

## Table 7

Spinning capacity and /uniFB01 neness in Lancashire.

Table 7 provides evidence of a highly specialized industry. Spinner-only /uniFB01 rms specialized in the production of /uniFB01 ne goods, while vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms specialized in the production of coarse goods. Because the spindleage capacity of spinner-only /uniFB01 rms was twice as large as that of vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms, and because ring spinning was not the most ef /uniFB01 cient way to produce /uniFB01 ne goods, this largely explains why rings were adopted so slowly in Britain at the end of the 18th century.

|                                | Spinners only   | Vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms   | Total   |
|--------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------------|---------|
| Counts 0 - 40 in 1890 (%)      | 53.4            | 75.6                                 | 61.1    |
| Count above 40 in 1890 (%)     | 46.6            | 24.4                                 | 38.9    |
| Counts 0 - 40 in 1902 (%)      | 50.7            | 67.8                                 | 55.6    |
| Count above 40 in 1902 (%)     | 49.3            | 32.2                                 | 44.3    |
| Counts 0 - 40 in 1910 (%)      | 36.8            | 64.9                                 | 41.5    |
| Count above 40 in 1910 (%)     | 62.9            | 35.1                                 | 58.4    |
| Number of /uniFB01 rms by type |                 |                                      |         |
| N 1890 (%)                     | 557 (62.2)      | 350 (37.8)                           | 907     |
| N 1902 (%)                     | 556 (64.9)      | 300 (35.0)                           | 856     |
| N 1910 (%)                     | 683 (70.7)      | 283 (29.3)                           | 966     |

Data: Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory, 1890, 1902 and 1910.

The middle panel reports the results using spindleage capacity rather than the number of /uniFB01 rms. Here, the results are less dramatic. In 1890 and 1910, approximately 90% of the spindling capacity of vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms was in /uniFB01 rms that were spinning both weft and twist yarns. The results in the top and middle panels imply that large integrated /uniFB01 rms generally produced both types of yarn. Some small vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms produced only one of the two.

The bottom panel reports the distribution of the spindling capacity by the /uniFB01 neness of the cloth woven and by whether twist and weft spinnings were done together. We observe that the percentages in this bottom panel basically follow the ones in the middle panel. For example, in 1890, 85.4% of the total spindleage capacity of the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms was used in the production of coarse goods (counts 0 -40) by /uniFB01 rms that were spinning both twist and weft. 70% of the total spindleage capacity of the spinneronly /uniFB01 rms was used in the production of coarse goods (counts 0 -40) by /uniFB01 rms that were spinning both twist and weft. These percentages were largely unchanged in 1910.

There are two key insights from Table 6. First, vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms that were only-spinning twist or weft yarn were still in existence in 1910. If the costs of shipping ring weft yarn were, in practice, as large as calculated by Lazonick and Leunig, then this sub-type of vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms should have declined over time, but it did not. Second, the shares of spindleage capacity and the number of /uniFB01 rms that were vertically integrated and spinner-only /uniFB01 rms did not change over time. If vertical integration was really the more ef /uniFB01 cient way to organize cotton production, we would have observed a decline in the number and spindleage capacity of spinner-only /uniFB01 rms, but that did not happen.

## 4.4. Producing /uniFB01 ner goods

To conclude this section on a positive note, I now use the new /uniFB01 rm-level data to provide additional evidence in favor of Leunig's explanation for Lancashire's continuing preference for the mule: the strong demand for /uniFB01 ne yarn and the sizeable yarn-export trade. Table 7 shows the distribution of the spindleage capacity by cloth /uniFB01 neness and by the organization of the /uniFB01 rms. In 1890, 75.6% of the spindleage capacity of the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms was for the production of coarse goods (counts between 0 and 40). 38 Among the spinner-only /uniFB01 rms, 53.4% of the spindleage capacity was for the production of coarse goods.

The striking piece of evidence is that between 1890 and 1910 there was a dramatic decline in the percentage of spindleage dedicated to the production of coarse goods. In 1910, only 36.8% of the spindleage capacity of the spinner-only /uniFB01 rms was used to produce coarse goods, down from 53.4%. Similarly, 64.9% of the spindleage capacity of the vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms was used to produce coarse goods, down from 75.6%.

## 5. Why did integrated adopted rings so late?

Astrikingandnovel /uniFB01 ndingisthatveryfewvertically integrated /uniFB01 rmshadadoptedanyringspinninguntil1902,andthensuddenly they started adopting the rings at a faster pace than spinning-only /uniFB01 rms. This is clear when we look at Table 5. Until 1902, the large majority (87 out of 109, approximately 80%) of the /uniFB01 rmsadoptingrings were spinner-only /uniFB01 rms. By 1910, the percentage of /uniFB01 rmsthat were spinner-only was down to 59% (197 out of 330). Why did vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms suddenly start adopting rings?

Oneverycompellingexplanationisrelated to thetimingof theintroduction of theNorthrop automatic loomin Britain. As Sandberg (1974) discusses, the Northrop loom was /uniFB01 rst introduced in 1902, and in 1904 the British Northrop Loom Company was established. This loom was not suited to /uniFB01 ne goods, which, as we saw, were mainly produced by spinner-only /uniFB01 rms. However, the Northrop loom

was particularly ef /uniFB01 cient in the production of coarse goods, which was the segment of the market mostly covered by vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms. Thus, vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms should have been adopting the new automatic loom, but, as Sandberg reports, they did so at a dramatically slow rate. Remarkably, in Worrall's Directory of 1910 there is one new vertically integrated /uniFB01 rm, Eccles Spinning &amp; Manufacturing Co, formed in 1905 and located in Patricroft, Manchester, which simultaneously adopted rings and Northrop looms.

The crucial insight here is that automatic looms required the greater strength of ring-spun as opposed to mule-spun yarn (Sandberg, 1974). As Sandberg explains, the complementarity between ring spinning and automatic weaving meant that plans to install automatic looms depended on the availability of ring spinning.

Vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms, which mainly produced coarse goods and whose survival was clearly at stake against foreign competitors, must have realized that they had to adopt rings in order to exploit the advantages of the automatic looms. This interpretation explains the sudden and dramatic increase in the rate of adoption of rings after 1902. 39

## 6. Conclusion

This paper uses /uniFB01 rm-level data to show that entrepreneurial failure does not explain the decline of the Lancashire cotton industry before World War I, at least as long as the test for entrepreneurial failure is based on differences in the adoption of rings between vertically integrated and non-integrated /uniFB01 rms.

This paper shows that the Lancashire cotton industry was highly specialized, with vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms producing primarily coarse goods and spinner-only /uniFB01 rms producing primarily yarn for /uniFB01 ne goods. This, together with the fact that the spindleage capacity of spinning-only /uniFB01 rms was twice as large as that of vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms and the strong demand for /uniFB01 ne yarn and the sizeable yarn-export trade, explains Lancashire's continuing preference for the mule.

Thispaperalsouncoversanewimportant /uniFB01 nding: very few vertically integrated /uniFB01 rmshadadoptedringspinningtoanyextentuntil 1902, and then suddenly they started adopting the rings at a faster pace than only-spinning /uniFB01 rms. Though more research is warranted to explain this /uniFB01 nding, here I propose an explanation based on the complementarity between ring spinning and automatic weaving. Vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms had to adopt ring spinning before adopting the automatic looms. This intuitive explanation elucidates why rings were adopted so late by vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms, and why automatic looms were adopted so slowly by British entrepreneurs.

## Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Joel Mokyr for detailed and constructive suggestions, and for funding my research at the British Library and at the Manchester Library. This paper is a revised version of the second chapter of my dissertation at Northwestern University, Illinois, United States. I have also bene /uniFB01 ted from conversations with Douglas Farnie, Stuart Gurrea, John James, Tim Leunig, Deirdre McCloskey, John Panzar, Robert Porter, and Carola Schenone. I also thank participants at the 75th Anniversary Conference of the Economic History Society at the University of Glasgow, April 2001. All remaining errors are mine. Finally, I would like to thank Lynda Sutton at the Archaeology Service, Lancashire County Council, Preston, United Kingdom, for her help with the maps from the Ordnance Survey.

## Appendix

## Data coding choices

The data are from Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directory for 1885, 1886 -7, 1890, 1893 -4, 1902 and 1910. These data contain information on the names of the /uniFB01 rms, locations, and types of spindles used by cotton /uniFB01 rms in Lancashire. They also contain information on the number of spindles (and looms) used by each /uniFB01 rm, the /uniFB01 neness of the product manufactured, and whether the /uniFB01 rm spun twist, weft, or both. Farnie (1979) discusses the reliability of Worrall's Directories.

This appendix discusses three data coding choices.

## Firms and mills

In a few cases mills changed ownership across the years. In those cases, with one exception (Ellis Meanock in Mossley, discussed below) I used the mill as the relevant unit of observation. For example, if the /uniFB01 rmTay in Oldham acquired a mill that was already in existence and placed rings in that pre-existing mill, then I coded the /uniFB01 rm Tay as an incumbent and not as a new entrant adopting rings. A different coding choice would have only a marginal effect on the results of this paper, because few mills changed ownership and adopted rings at the same time. In 1902 there were 7 /uniFB01 rms out of 51, or 13% of the /uniFB01 rms, which /uniFB01 t this description. There was only a handful in 1910, by which time more than 200 /uniFB01 rms had adopted rings.

## Potential for misreporting

Firms are listed in Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c as having adopted rings when they /uniFB01 rst reported rings in Worrall's Directories. This is not an obvious data coding decision because in some cases there is reason to believe that /uniFB01 rms might have adopted rings before

the listed year. For example, the /uniFB01 rm Palm Mill in Oldham reported 40,000 ring spindles in 1887 and 40,000 (type not speci /uniFB01 ed) spindles in 1885. One might be tempted to infer that the /uniFB01 rm Palm Mill had adopted rings already in 1885. In this paper I have decided not to make this type of assumptions and instead I have coded the data exactly as it is in Worrall's Directories. To get a sense of the possible misrepresentation problem, I identi /uniFB01 ed 46 /uniFB01 rms out of the 330 (i.e. 13% of the sample) that had adopted rings by 1910 and for which one could possibly argue that the /uniFB01 rms had adopted rings earlier than what is reported in Worrall's Directories.

These /uniFB01 rms are Walker in Hyde, Victoria in Manchester, Lees in Oldham, Arkwright in Rochdale, Healey in Rochdale, Glodwick in Oldham, Lees in Oldham, Mutual in Heywood, Roach in Heywood, Irk Mill in Middleton, Wood in Middleton, James Stott in Oldham, Park Lane in Preston, Halliday in Wigan, Eli Dyson in Farnsworth, Hodgkinsons in Heywood, Isherwood in Heywood, Railway in Heywood, Roe Acre in Heywood, Storey in Lancaster, Broadbent in Manchester, Richardson in Manchester, Millbrook in Stalybridge, Staley in Stalybridge, Shepherd in Waterfoot, Witham in Burnley, Bury &amp; Elton in Bury, Holdsworth in Manchester, Clegg in Oldham, Tattersall in Rochdale, Heginbottom in Ashton, Richard Thompson in Blackburn, Trafalgar in Burnley, Bury Cooperative Manufacturing Co. in Bury, Wood in Glossop, Sefton Mill in Heywood, Burton in Leigh, Armitage in Manchester, Rylands in Manchester, Eccles in Preston, Broadley in Rochdale, Harrison in Stalybridge, Pearson in Stockport, Barker in Todmorden, Fielden in Todmorden, and Eckersleys in Wigan.

The only /uniFB01 rms for which I use an imputation methodology are Haugh in Rochdale and Ellis Meanock in Mossley, which I list as new entrants in 1887, even though they were already in the market in 1885. The point here is that both of these /uniFB01 rms entered into the market when they installed rings, so for the purposes of my analysis (Table 4a) they should really be considered as new entrants. Notice that Ellis Meanock used a pre-existing mill, but I still consider it as a new entrant. It is the only case in the dataset for which I make this choice.

Of these 46 /uniFB01 rms, 26 (i.e. 54%) were spinner-only. Because the fraction of /uniFB01 rms potentially misreporting is small (approximately 10%), and because both spinner-only and vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms are included in this group, there is no reason to think that misreporting should bias the results of the analysis against vertically integrated /uniFB01 rms.

## Inconsistencies in Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directories

For 1902 and 1910 Worrall's The Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers' Directories provide information on the count of the yarn spun by the /uniFB01 rms and on the type of spindle used -whether ring, water, or mule -in two locations. First, as part of the complete /uniFB01 rm listing, together with the information on the number of spindles and the names of the mills owned. Second, at the end of the Directories, where there is an alphabetical list of the /uniFB01 rms in Lancashire. These two sources of information are not always consistent with each other. Here, I take the superset of the two sets of information. In other words, if a /uniFB01 rm is reported as having adopted rings in either one of the locations then I code the /uniFB01 rm as having adopted rings.

## References

Aldcroft, D.H., 1964. The entrepreneur and the British economy, 1870 -1914. Economic History Review 2nd. ser. 17, 113 -134.

Broadberry, S., Marrison, A., 2002. External economies of scale in the Lancashire cotton industry, 1900 -1939. Economic History Review 55, 51 -77.

Cotton Manufactures, 1912. Report of the Tariff Board on Schedule I of the Tariff Law. House of Representatives, Washington.

Farnie, Douglas, 1979. The English Cotton Industry and the World Market. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Farnie, D.A., 2004. The role of merchants as the prime movers in the expansion of the cotton industry, 1760 -1990. In: Farnie, D.A., Jeremy, D.J. (Eds.), The Fibre that Changed the World: The Cotton Industry in International Perspective, 1600 -1990s. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 15 -56.

Gatrell, V.A.C., 1977. Labour, power, and the size of /uniFB01 rms in Lancashire cotton in the second quarter of the nineteenth century. Economic History Review 2nd. ser., 30, 95 -139 February.

Huberman, Michael, 1990. Vertical disintegration in Lancashire: a Comment on Temin. The Journal of Economic History 50 (3) September. Jewkes, J., 1930. The localisation of the cotton industry. Economic Review 2 January.

- Lazonick, William, 1981a. Factor costs and the diffusion of ring spinning in Britain prior to World War I. Quarterly Journal of Economics 96 (1), 89 -109.

Lazonick, William, 1981b. Production relations, labor productivity, and choice of technique: British and US cotton spinning. Journal of Economic History 41 (3),

## 491 -516.

Lazonick, William, 1984. Rings and mules in Britain: reply. Quarterly Journal of Economics (2), 393 -398.

Lazonick, William, 1987. Stubborn mules: some comments. Economic History Review 2nd. ser. (40) (1), 80 -86.

Timothy Leunig, The Myth of the Corporate Economy, Unpublished Dissertation, Nuf /uniFB01 eld College, Oxford University, 1996.

Leunig, Timothy, 2001. New answers to old questions: explaining the slow adoption of ring spinning in Lancashire, 1880 -1913. Journal of Economic History 61 (2). Leunig, Timothy, 2003. A British industrial success: productivity in the Lancashire and New England cotton spinning industries a century ago. Economic History Review LVI (1), 90 -117.

Mass, W., Lazonick, W., 1990. The British cotton industry and international comparative advantage: the state of the debates. Business History 32 (4), 9 -

65.

McCloskey, Deirdre, Sandberg, Lars, 1971. From damnation to redemption: judgments on the late Victorian entrepreneur. Explorations in Economic History 9 (1),

89 -108 Republished in Deirdre McCloskey, Enterprise and Trade in Victorian Britain, Allen &amp; Unwin, London, 1981.

Mokyr, J., 2001. The rise and fall of the factory system: technology, /uniFB01 rms, and households since the industrial revolution. Carnegie -Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 55, 1 -45 December.

Musson, A.E., 1959. The great depression in Britain, 1873 -1896: a reappraisal. Journal of Economic History 19 (2), 199 -228.

Robson, R., 1957. The Cotton Industry in Britain, Macmillan &amp; Co. Ltd., London.

Sandberg, Lars, 1969. American rings and English mules: the role of economic rationality. Quarterly Journal of Economics 83 (1), 25 -43.

Sandberg, Lars, 1974. Lancashire in Decline: a Study in Entrepreneurship, Technology, and International Trade. The Ohio State University Press.

Saxonhouse, Gary, Wright, Gavin, 1984. New evidence on the stubborn English mules and the cotton industry, 1878 -1920. Economic History Review 37 (4), 507 -519.

Saxonhouse, Gary, Wright, Gavin, 2010. National Leadership and Competing Technological Paradigms: The Globalization of Cotton Spinning, 1878 -1933 (with Gary Saxonhouse). Journal of Economic History 70, 535 -566.

Temin, Peter, 1990. Product quality and vertical integration in the early cotton textile industry: a reply. Journal of Economic History 50 (3) September. Ure, Andrew, 1836. The Cotton Manufacture of Great Britain, London.